NUCLEAR PHOTOEFFECT 


(3) Evaluation of My.p. 


ee b(8/2)? 
P| Fea(B PAF 4g) [PA +8) 
_(=1)"6'/2)"PU — 7g) 
NTU ip. 
AUGUST 15, 1937 


PHYSICAL REVIEW 


273 


Cy Se In| Sinn | 
n=0 m=0 I=0 

_ (= 1)(8"/2)"0 (1 Fig) 

m'T(m+1it+ig) ' 


pt+ian+2m-+ig |’ 
(—1)"(6/2)"rU+p) | 
n!T(n+1+ ) 


n= 


VOLUME 52 


Note on Nuclear Photoeffect at High Energies 


F, Katcxar, J. R. OPPENHEIMER AND R. SERBER 
University of California, Berkeley, California 


(Received May 19, 1937) 


In I we consider nuclear transmutations when the energy is so high that the levels of the 
compound nuclei formed have a spacing smaller than their breadth, and investigate the rela- 
tions between the cross sections for the various possible reactions and the decay constants 
characteristic of the compound nuclei. When the collision may be treated as a resonance effect, 
these relations take a simple form. In II we apply these considerations to the photoelectric 
disintegration of nuclei of intermediate atomic weight by 17 Mev y-rays, and suggest that the 
yields should show a marked increase for y-rays of somewhat lower energy. In III we study the 
formal connection between the evaluation of transmutation probabilities here given and the 
resonance formulae appropriate for lower excitation energies, and show that both Gesceiptlons 
may be derived as limiting cases from the same formalism. 


I 


OHR’S analysis! of nuclear phenomena has 
shown the great importance, for an under- 
standing of the processes of nuclear disintegra- 
tion, of the capture of the incident particle with 
the formation of an intermediate nucleus having 
a considerable excitation energy, and so long a 
lifetime that the subsequent transformation of 
this unstable structure by the emission of par- 
ticles (or y-rays) may be treated as an inde- 
pendent process. A formalism consistent with 
these ideas, and especially appropriate to the 
study of the behavior of slow neutrons, has been 
developed by Breit and Wigner,? who have con- 
sidered the case that the energy levels of the 
compound nucleus lie far apart compared to their 
breadth, and have applied the familiar quantum 
mechanical dispersion formulae to this problem. 
For sufficiently heavy nuclei and sufficiently high 
excitation energies the intermediate nucleus will 
however no longer have well-defined energy 
levels; instead the states of the system, and even 
the states of a particular kind, e.g., of a given 
angular momentum, will form a continuum. One 


1N, Bohr, Science, to be published. 
2 Breit and Wigner, Phys. Rev. 49, 519 (1936). 


might hope that the disappearance of any char- 
acteristic level structure would lead to a simpli- 
fication in the description of the probabilities of 
nuclear disintegration, and that the only quan- 
tities which then determine these probabilities 
would be the rates at which a wave packet repre- 
senting the intermediate nucleus comes apart 
into the various possible residual nuclei and 
emitted particles. 

This expectation is not however in agreement 
with the result given by a simple application of 
the principle of detailed balancing to the 
processes of formation and disintegration of the. 
compound system. Thus we may divide the 
states of the compound nucleus into sets (i) each 
of which is characterized by decay constants 
which in the limit of close lying levels may be 
regarded as slowly varying functions of the 
energy, and by a density of levels 1/s* per unit 
energy. Then we obtain a relation between the 
cross section o. for the capture of an incident 
particle and the decay constants I'ao’/A for the 
reemission of this particle with its original 
energy: | 


oe (N2/2w4) DP aoi/sé, (1) 


274 F. KALCKAR, J. R. 
where \=h/p is the wave-length of the incident 
particle, and wa is the combined statistical 
weight of the initial states of incident particle 
and bombarded nucleus. If then I';,‘/f is the rate 
of emission of a particle of type k, I'*/fA is the 
total decay constant of a state (i), then the cross 
sections for transmutation are just 
2 Tool x! 
0; = —-—_ = 


2WA a s'T? 


(2) 


This formula can also be brought into connection 
with the results derived by Breit and Wigner for 
the case of well separated levels (I’<s*): 


(E) ? 3 Peo es 
o =——_—— ' 
drwy, TF (E-E,) (0)? 


hare G 


Here F is the total energy of the system, and £,’ 
the energy of one of its quasi-stationary states. 
As Bethe and Placzek* have pointed out, from 
(3) we can obtain a cross section, averaged over 
a range of energy large compared to spacing of 
the levels, which agrees with (2). One might 
thus suppose that although for the derivation of 
(3) the condition I’<s‘* is essential, no such 
restriction limited the validity of (2). 

Nevertheless, if one formulates the problem 
for the case ['*>s* in terms of the same disper- 
sion-theoretic formalism as leads in the other 
limiting case to (3), and assumes as before that 
the collision may be treated as a resonance 
effect, one is led, not to (2), but to the radically 
different 

a Lele 


Ces oa 
Coos 


TWA 1 
where the summation >> is to be taken over all 
4 


sets of noncombining states of the compound 
nucleus, and where, as before, the I’s for each 
set are supposed to vary slowly with energy. 
Since (4) differs from (2) by the substitution for 
1/s* of 2/(mT*), and since I'*>s*, the cross 
sections’ given by (4) are smaller than those 
given by (2). As we shall see in III, the formal 
reason for this, and the reason for the failure of 
the statistical argument leading to (2), is that 
the ‘‘combining”’ states of the compound nucleus 
lying within a line breadth of each other do not 


3 Bethe and Placzek, Phys. Rev. 51, 450 (1937). 


(4) 


OPPENHEIMER AND R. 


SERBER 


at all act independently, and that strong de- 
structive interference is involved in the proba- 
bility of their excitation [ cf. (12) ]. The coherence 
of phases implied by this interference is itself a 
consequence of the assumption that the processes 
involved in the collision may be adequately 
described in terms of resonance between states 
representing the incident particle (which may be 
elastically scattered at the surface of the nu- 
cleus), and other states of the compound system 
which have a very long life (~#/I"). This in turn 
implies that it is not necessary to include in the 
description those wave packets built up from 
the long lived states of the compound system, 
which represent short lived compound nuclei, and 
which correspond physically, on the one hand, 
to “surface effect’? inelastic scattering and 
transmutation, and on the other to the possi- 
bility of forming the intermediate nucleus by a 
sequence of processes involving compound 
systems of increasingly long life and more 
complete energy degradation. 

In the problem of the radiative capture of 
slow neutrons to which the Breit-Wigner formula 
was first applied, the characteristic energy de- 
pendence of the observed cross sections itself 
indicates the appropriateness of describing the 
collision as a resonance effect. But in the other 
limiting case, where I'>s*, neither (2) nor (4) 
may be applied without a careful examination 
of the physical problem. Since I increases, and 
s* decreases, with the excitation energy, (2) and 
(4) differ more and more as the energy of the 
bombarding particle increases. It is in any case 
clear that the factor I'ao*/T* which occurs in (4) 
will fall off rapidly with energy because of the 
increasing improbability of a complete concen- 
tration of the excitation energy, and for suf- 
ficiently high energies the description of the 
collision as a resonance effect must in general be 
completely inappropriate. 

A striking illustration of this is afforded by the 
impacts of quite fast neutrons on nuclei. In this 
case, as one may see from the simple mechanical 
model discussed by Bohr,! it will be extremely un- 
likely that the energy of the incident neutron will 
at once be divided among all the nuclear par- 
ticles; rather the normal course of events will 
involve an inelastic impact near the surface of 
the nucleus, in some cases leading merely to the 


NUCLEAR PHOTOEFFECT 


ejection of a particle with reduced energy, but 
quite often followed by a series of further impacts 
which lead ultimately to the complete degrada- 
tion of the energy and the formation of a com- 
pound system of very long life. Such a situation 
cannot be formally described in terms of a 
simple resonance effect, nor can the formation of 
the compound system be treated without con- 
sidering the wave packets which represent the 
surface disturbances and short lived intermediate 
states. On the other hand just the complication 
of the mechanisms actually involved in the 
formation of the compound nucleus may offer 
some justification, in this case, for the assump- 
tion of random phases’ involved in the derivation 
of (2). 

A still more striking case of the inadequacy 
of (4) to describe transmutations we find in 
reactions initiated by bombardment with high 
energy deuterons, where, in spite of the fact 
that the emission of a deuteron of high energy 


from a compound nucleus must be extremely 


rare, the cross section for deuteron induced 
transmutations can be of the order of magnitude 
of the area of the nucleus. It is clear that here in 
the course of the formation of the compound 
nucleus, the original coupling between proton 
and neutron will be completely dissolved, and 
that the formation of the compound nucleus, 
whether it involves the capture of proton or 
neutron or both, may surely not be considered 
as a single process. | 

As an example of a problem to which we may 
make a tentative application of (4), we may 
consider the nuclear photoeffect in complex 
nuclei, for y-ray energies high enough to make 
I> s*, and yet low enough so that the absorption 


of the radiation can be treated as a resonance 


effect. That such a treatment can remain valid 
for higher excitation energies for y-rays than for 
neutrons depends upon the fact that the inter- 
action between a y-ray and a nuclear particle is 
smaller in order of magnitude than that between 
the particles themselves: whereas the waves 
representing incident neutrons of high energy 
will be very rapidly damped out at the surface 
of the nucleus, those representing y-rays will be 
practically undamped, and therefore far more 


4Compare the discussion of W. Pauli, Sommerfeld 
Festschrift, p. 30, 1928. 


275 


effective in exciting oscillations of the nucleus as 
a whole. Apart from a necessarily rough estimate 
of the contribution of the nonresonance effects, 
to which we shall refer again in II, and which 
shows that it may well be smaller than that 
given by (4), there is some experimental evidence 
in favor of the applicability of (4) to this 
problem, in that the smallness of the ratio of the 
effects observed for light nuclei (N™, O18) to 
those observed for nuclei of intermediate atomic 
weight is most easily interpreted in terms of the 
far shorter lifetime of the lighter compound 
nuclei. 


I] 


It is, of course, not possible at present to 
calculate the I'’s on the basis of any complete 
nuclear theory; and, particularly in those 
problems to which classical arguments cannot 
be simply applied, one must resort to the trans- 
mutation experiments themselves, and may hope 
to use (4) and (2) in some cases to correlate the 
values of the I'’s so obtained. It is from this 
point of view that we shall discuss the photo- 
disintegration of nuclei by high energy y-rays. 
For nuclei of intermediate weight we would 
expect that the compound nucleus formed by 
absorption of the y-ray will ordinarily dissipate 
its energy by the emission of neutrons, since the 
emission of a charged particle would require a 
much greater concentration of energy in the 
escaping particle than is required by a neutron, 
because of the necessity of its clearing the 
Coulomb barrier. This argument may not how- 
ever be applied to those nuclei, relatively 
common for atomic weight below 20 and above 
150, for which the emission of a charged particle 
is energetically far more favorable than that of 
a neutron... 

Experiments on the capture of thermal energy 
neutrons (nuclear excitation energy~8& Mev) 
give neutron widths ,~10-‘v. As the excitation 
energy is increased, the neutron width will at 
first be proportional to the velocity of the 
neutron; hence for an energy a million volts 
higher we would estimate T',,~1v. For still larger 
excitation energy the neutron width will increase 
very rapidly, because of the rapidly increasing 
number of probable modes of disintegration. For 
several million volts additional excitation energy 


276 F. KALCKAR, J. 
we would therefore expect I, of the order of 
some tens or hundreds of volts. The spacing 
between levels is between 10 and 100 v for 8 Mev 
excitation energy, decreases rapidly with in- 
creasing energy, and should become less than IT, 
for several million volts additional energy. Thus 
when a nucleus is raised by absorption of a y-ray 
to an excitation energy greater than this, the 
level breadth will surely be wider than the 
spacing between levels, and we may try to use 
(4) to discuss the problem. Since in all probability 
I'~T,>T,, the cross section for neutron emission 
is | 
n= (?/wat) LT y0%/Ta'. 


We may expect that the number of noncombining 
sets (i) which contribute appreciably would be 
comparable with wy, and shall thus write 


on~ (N/T) Py0/T ny (S) 


where here the I's may be regarded as appropri- 
ate averages over the contributing noncombining 
sets (i). 

The photoeffects produced in many nuclei by 
the 17 Mev y-ray of Li7+H! have been studied 
by Bothe and Gentner,® who do in fact find that 
the typical reaction involves the ejection of a 
neutron. Their estimate, o,~107?? cm’, gives 
at once, since \?/7~10-% cm?, 


Pyo/Tn~ 10-4, 


If we combine with this the estimate of some 
100 v for T, at these energies, we find that I'yo 
must be of the order of 1/100 of a volt, about a 
tenth of the total radiative breadth of the 
resonances found in slow neutron capture. In 
fact one might expect that [yo would not change 
very much in going from excitations of 8 to 17 
Mev; for, on the one hand, it will increase with 
a high power (probaby the fifth power charac- 
teristic of electric quadripole and magnetic 
dipole radiation) of the frequency; on the other, 
it will decrease exponentially very roughly with 
the square root of the energy because of the 
smaller probability of finding all the excitation 
energy in a single mode of high frequency.® Thus 
if one supposes that the electric moments asso- 


5 Bothe and Gentner, Naturwiss. 25, 90, 126, 191 (1937). 
6 A discussion of these questions is to be published by 
Bohr and Kalckar, ; 


R. OPPENHEIMER AND R. SERBER 


ciated with these oscillations of varying frequency 
are of the same type and order of magnitude at 
8 and at 17 Mev, the variation of the two factors 
on which I’, depends will tend to cancel. We 
should then expect that in this range c, should 
increase with decreasing y-ray energy, and 
continue to increase until I, becomes equal to 
the spacing between levels. At this point (y-ray 
energy ~10-12 Mev). we should have I[',o/T, 
~10-?—10-%, and a cross section, o,, between 
10-% and 10-26 cm?. For still lower energies (5) 
is no longer valid; we must then, as pointed out 
by Bethe and Placzek, apply (2), ie., in (5) 
replace T, by (2/7)s. In this range the cross 
section will decrease with decreasing energy, as 
s increases. 

It would thus be interesting to see if such an 
increase in yield occurs when photodisintegra- 
tions are produced by y-rays of lower energy. 
Two points must, however, be kept in mind. In 
the first place there are in the Li spectrum’ 
y-rays of about 14 Mev which may contribute 
as much to the photoeffect as the 17 Mev line. 
Moreover, since the yields from 10-12 Mev 
radiation may be much larger than those at the 
higher energies, the presence of any appreciable 
contamination of such degraded radiation in the 
experiments we have quoted would render their 
interpretation uncertain, and the maximum 
cross sections we suggest might be much too 
large. 

In the second place, our discussion has been 
based on the use of (4); and we know that the 
validity of this is conditioned by the possibility 
of disregarding short-lived intermediate states 
and their contribution to the formation of the 
compound nucleus. It is clear that as the energy 
of the y-ray is indefinitely increased, processes 
of absorption involving the dipole moment 
associated with the acceleration of a single par- 
ticle, will be essential even for those impacts in 
which a long lived compound nucleus is ulti- 
mately formed. To estimate the order of magni- 
tude of the relative contribution of these processes 
compared to the resonance effects described by 
(4), one may in (5) replace I'yo/% by the radiative 
transition probability to the normal state for a 
wave packet representing a concentration of all 


7 Delsasso, Fowler and Lauritsen, Phys. Rev. 51, 391 


(1937). 


NUCLEAR PHOTOEFFECT 


the excitation energy in one particle, and 
further replace #4/T, by the nuclear collision 
time, and must include a factor to take into 
account the fact that several wave packets of 
this type can take part in the absorption process. 
It seems difficult to obtain a good enough evalu- 
ation of the quantities involved to tell us for 
‘what energies (4) will become inapplicable. As 
already pointed out however, the fact that the 
photoelectric yields for 17 Mev radiation from 
O' and N" are only about one percent of those 
from heavier nuclei’ is a strong indication that 
resonance effects predominate at these energies, 
since the lifetime of an intermediate state of a 
light nucleus is so.much smaller than that of a 
heavy nucleus with the same excitation energy 
that on the basis of (4), and even allowing for a 
considerable increase in I'yo, one would anticipate 
much smaller photoelectric yields. 


III 


We want now to look more closely at the 
formal derivation of the result (4), and at the 
relation of our treatment to the more familiar 
application of dispersion formulae to nuclear 
problems. 

According to Bohr’s picture the intermediate 
nucleus lasts for a time long compared to the 
mean time between collisions of particles in the 
nucleus. In attempting to take this fact into 
account in formulating a dispersion theoretic 
treatment of collision problems, certain simpli- 
fying assumptions must be introduced, which 
state that the incident particle may only be 
either elastically scattered at the surface of the 
nucleus, or captured to form a compound system 
of long life which subsequently disintegrates. 
This can be so only when the short-lived com- 
pound systems, which are characteristic of 
surface effects, are not involved in the inelastic 
scattering or transmutations. The formal con- 
sequence of this simplification is that we can 
then describe the collision in terms of resonance 
between two quite distinct types of states, each 
of which may be supposed to give an approxi- 
mate description of a stationary state of the 
whole system. One of these sets, w,, corresponds 

8 We are indebted to Dr. Cockcroft for telling us of 


these experiments carried out by Goldhaber and his 
collaborators. 


277 


just to discrete excited states of the compound 
nuclei; the other set, w., represents asymptoti- 
cally a definite residual nucleus in a definite 
state, and definite free particles of given energies. 
In setting up these states, we may so choose the 
y, and their energies E,, that the coupling be- 
tween the various 7 states is as far as possible 
eliminated, and the y, so that we may neglect 
all terms in the Hamiltonian directly coupling 
the s states with each other. The long life of the 
compound nucleus now means that the coupling 
between the 7 and s states is so small that the 
decay time of the 7 states is very long compared 
to the nuclear collision time: the condition that 
in the description of the collision process short- 
lived compound nuclei do not appear means that 
the coupling between 7 and s states is effective 
only near resonance, and that we need not con- 
sider wave packets built up from the ¥, whose 
lifetime is much smaller than that of the states 
y, themselves. 

If we now call the matrix elements of the total 
Hamiltonian H,,, H,;, Hs, our conditions on 
the y, mean that H,,- may be treated as a 
diagonal matrix: 


I... =E,6(s—s’). 


The optimal elimination of the coupling between 
the r states means, that not H,,-, but H,,- cor- 
rected for the “‘line shifts’? due to the coupling 
with the s states, is diagonal: 


Hy +P ‘ dsH,,H/(E—E,) =E be, (6) 


where £ is the total energy of the system. We 
now try to find a wave function of the form 


y os Yot Lobe t [scabs 


where Wo is that one of the y, which represents 
asymptotically the bombarding particle and the 
bombarded nucleus, and is normalized so that 
the incident flux is unity. The wave equation for 
the c’s is then 


Ec,= CHmcwt | dsHucet Hoo (7) 


(E—E,)¢s= DH r€;. (8) 


278 F, KALCKAR, J. 
From this, substituting c, from (8) in (7), and 
using (6), 


4 yxy 
Xr =/7 6 ie. a ee pe ee Re (9) 
pi eee ee 


where i re =D LT rH and the sum 2 is 


mien over all ates with #,=£, and ieee we 
have introduced 


) Ca ie — FE, Ad ep, 


which varies smoothly with £. 

The assumption that no short-lived inter- 
mediate nuclei contribute now means that we 
may neglect the contribution to the sum in (9) 
of all states 7’ for which |Z,,—E|>>T,.,.. When 
the spacing of the levels, s,, is large compared to 
I’., we then get at once 


x¥,=H, when E,~E. (10) 


In the other limiting case, with s,<«<TI;,,, many 
terms in the sum contribute. We may then 
suppose that the I'’s vary smoothly from level to 
level. There may of course be various sets of 
intermediate states, for example states of given 
angular momentum, with quite different sets of 
I’s; but in general one will expect this only when 
the different sets of levels belong to different 
representations of a group of transformations 
which leave the Hamiltonian approximately 
invariant, and in this case each such set (i) may 
be considered separately ; there will be no inter- 
ference between different sets and their con- 


tributions to the cross section will be simply © 


additive, so that from now on we shall consider 
only a single such set. The summation in (9) 
may thus be replaced by an integral 


dE, Dy Xp 
= H,.—- | ener see 
Z Sp? (E — Fy + SUD ppt) 


If then we neglect the contribution of levels 
|E.—E|>T.,, and the variation over the line 
breadth of the matrix elements of ZZ, we may 
replace the integral by its residue. The solution 
of (11) is then 


(11) 


TL ygld xo 
Xr = Fo ae 
2s,+arl rT 


25,f1 +9 


NS 


(12) 


R. OPPENHEIMER AND R. 


SERBER 


except when |£,—|>>I, and where £,~£ and 
r=T,,. Because of the assumed asymptotic form 
of y,, one sees from (8) that the cross section for 
a process of type & involving the emission of a 
given particle and leaving the nucleus in a given 
state is 


on = (20/h) Xu | LL encr|”, (13) 


where > is to be taken over all states s, with 


s=k 
E,=E, and leading to a disintegration of type &. 
From (10), (12) and (13), and treating the sum 
over 7 as before, we then get 


Qa | FZ 0| : Xe Lass? 
ae r'>s, 
h Tr 7 a 
~f. (1 
p 
y) Patna De lg? 
Tv s=k 
’ r<s, 


i (E—E,)?+31° 


Because of the asymptotic form of y, and wo, 
the matrix elements occurring in (14) are con- 
nected with the decay constant I, for the disin- 
tegration of type k, and the decay constant Tao 
for the reemission of the incident particle with 
its initial energy, by 


T,=24 > Ws erate | er ee (4rwa/hd*) | H,o|?. 
s=k 


We thus have 


Tool; 
2 4 PSs, 
TWA Tt? 
Nes Pools 


E,~E. 


= = P< Ss: 
Anwa (E—F,)?4+ 41" 


By summing over all sets of intermediate states 
(i) we get from this (3) and (4). It is clearly not 
possible by formal arguments alone to decide 
whether, in a given problem, the incisive con- 
ditions necessary for the validity of (3) or (4) are 
really fulfilled. For this, as in the case of the 
nuclear photoeffect, a detailed discussion of the 
physical problem is in general essential. 


