AUGUST 15, 1937 


PHYSICAL REVIEW 


VOLUME 52 


Note on Resonances in Transmutations of Light Nuclei 


F. Katcxar, J. R. OPPENHEIMER AND R. SERBER 
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 


(Received May 19, 1937) 


It is shown that the sharp resonance effects observed in many transmutations involving light 
nuclei require the existence of fairly strict selection rules to limit the decay rates of the cor- 
responding compound nuclei. Such selection rules in several cases follow from the slowness of 
the interconversion of spin and orbital angular momentum. Some consequences of this are 
discussed for the bombardment of B and F by protons. 


HEN light nuclei are bombarded with 


protons, the transmutation functions for 
the various alternative reactions are often radi- 
cally different. This suggests that, by bombard- 
ment of a given nucleus, compound nuclei can be 
formed which have quite different properties. 
Thus in the reaction 


Li?7+ H'!— (Bea*)—2He? (1a) 


the yield of 8 cm a-particles increases steadily 
with bombarding voltage, and for low energies, 
where such considerations are applicable, follows 
the course expected from the arguments of 
Gamow on the penetration of the potential 
barrier by the proton. On the other hand the 
reaction in which high energy y-rays are emitted, 


Li7+H!~>(Bez’)— Be’+y, (1b) 


exhibits a pronounced and sharp resonance at a 
bombarding energy of 440 kv.! 

With the proton bombardment of fluorine, the 
situation is similar but a little more complicated. 
Here too the 6 cm a-particle yield from the 
reaction 


sarap New pO aie: (2a) 


increases rapidly with bombarding energy,” but 
the y-ray transmutation function! shows sharp 
resonances of increasing magnitude at 330 kv, 
890 kv, 940 kv. Two reactions have been pro- 
posed to account for these y-rays, 


F194. H (Neg?) (Oz!) + Het 


—O'-+Het+y (2b) 
1 Hafstad, Heydenburg and Tuve, Phys. Rev. 50, 504 
(1936). 


2 Henderson, Livingston and Lawrence, Phys. Rev. 46, 
38 (1934). 


Flt Hl (Ne;?)> (Nec?) +y 
a Ol6+ Het+-+¥ 
Net ysey 


where again the parentheses indicate excited 
nuclei. At least for low bombarding energies the 
y-rays are approximately monochromatic,’ with 
an energy ~6 Mev; the excitation energy of the 
Nes” is more than twice this. 

Still more complicated is the bombardment of 
B" with protons. Here most of the a-particles are 
to be ascribed‘ to the reaction 


B'U+H"> (Cy) (Bes’) + He*+>3He}," 


(2b’) 


(3a) 


where the Be,’ has an excitation of a few Mev. 
The yield of these alpha-particles increases 
smoothly®> and without marked evidence of 
resonance for bombarding energies up to 600 kv. 
On the other hand both the reactions 


BU-+ H1> (Cz")— Be’+ Het 
BU+tH' 9 (Cg2)-C8+y 


(3b) 
(3b) 


show®: ® sharp resonance at 180 kv. The yield of 
y-rays increases again markedly” at about 700 
kv, suggesting the existence of a further reson- 
ance level in this neighborhood. 

Since in any case the sharpness of resonance 
is a measure of the lifetime of the compound 
nucleus formed by the capture of the bombarding 
particle, the compound nuclei Bex®, Nes”, Cz” 
must differ very radically from Bey’, Neg?®, Ca” 
as to their possibilities and rates of disintegra- 
tion. Now in each of the cases we are considering, 
3 Delsasso, Fowler and Lauritsen, Phys. Rev. 51, 527, 
ine and Gilbert, Proc. Roy. Soc. 154, 279 (1936). 
ion Wells, Tate and Hill, Phys. Rev. 51, 434 


6 Bothe and Gentner, Zeits. f. Physik 104, 685 (1937). 
’ Fowler and Lauritsen, private communication. 


279 


280 F. KALCKAR, J. 


there are just three energetically possible modes 

of disintegration: 

(1) Reemission of the bombarding proton, with decay 
constant T,/h, 


(2) emission of an a-particle, T,/h, 
(3) y-radiation, Ty/h. 


The decay constant of the compound nucleus 
will be just T/ZA=(T,+T.4+1T,)/h. The absence 
of marked resonance effects for the A-reactions 
shows that I must be very large for the A nuclei; 
I’, is always small, and I’, is surely small for low 
bombarding energies because of the effect of 
the barrier. Under these circumstances [~T,g, 
T,>r,, Ta2>r,. Thus the sharp resonances 
observed for the B-reactions show that the B 
nuclei can disintegrate by a-emission, either not 
at all, or very much more slowly than the A 
nuclei. The reaction (3b) shows that in this case 
at least we have to do with retarded but not 
forbidden a-decay. What is then the distinction 
between the A and B nuclei which brings about 
this great difference in behavior? 

For the case of Bes’, a satisfactory answer to 
this question has already been given,! for since 
two unexcited a-particles are necessarily de- 
scribed by a wave function which is even with 
respect to the mirroring of the coordinates of all 
particles in the center of mass, a state of Be® 
will not be able to decay into two such a-particles 
at all if it is odd; we thus account qualitatively 
for the facts if we say that Be,® is even, Bez® 
odd. Analogous considerations of parity are 
however inapplicable to C! and Ne?®, since the 
disintegration products are not in these cases 
identical nuclei. It is true that arguments of 
parity may demand that the a-particle come off 
with a relative angular momentum different from 
zero; but the energy of the a-particle is so high 
that this will not alter the order of magnitude of 
the decay constant. We have thus to ask what 
other selection rule can so markedly reduce the 
a-decay rate of the two nuclei Cz”, Ne,”°. 

Now there is one feature of nuclear forces 
which follows quite generally from the fact that 
the velocities of neutrons and protons are small 
compared to c, that we have here an essentially 
nonrelativistic problem. This is that the total 
spin S of the neutrons and protons, and their 
total orbital angular momentum JL, will vary 


R. OPPENHEIMER AND R. SERBER 


only very slowly with time; 8 for the coupling 
between them which is responsible for their vari- 
ation is of the order (v/c)?, and corresponds, 
according to the suggestion of Inglis,® merely to 
the Thomas precession of the spins in accelerated 
motion (wr= —(vXv)/2c?). Thus the ideas of 
Bohr on the ease of energy exchange between par- 
ticles, and the fact that nuclear forces surely do 
depend upon the relative spin orientations of the 
particles, guarantee a rapid exchange on the one 
hand of the orbital angular momentum among 
the particles composing the nucleus, and on the 
other of the individual particle spins, but do not 
in any way alter the approximate constancy of 
S and L. In fact, since the rate of conversion of 
spin into orbital angular momentum should be 
proportional to the square of the coupling energy, 
this conversion should take a time larger than 
the nucleus collision time by a factor of the order 
(c/v)*~ 104,19 

Now for the a-particle certainly S=0. More- 
over, for the product nuclei Be’, O!® one would 
expect from very general symmetry arguments 
that the lowest states would have paired neutron 
and proton spins and S=0. Thus the normal 


-a-decay products will have vanishing spin, and 
‘only when the intermediate nucleus too has S=0 


will this normal a-decay be rapid; for compound 
nuclei with S0, the possibility of such decay 
will depend on the interconversion of spin and 
orbital angular momentum, the decay time will 
in any case be increased by a factor (c/v)*, and 
marked resonance effects will appear. The 
absence of such resonance for the A nuclei shows 
that for them S=0; thus normal F!® and B!! 
must have S=4, as indeed one would expect. 
We then wish to suggest that Ne z?’, Cp” are 
triplet states, with S=1. More generally, it 


7a LZ and S would be constants of the motion for any 
nuclear Hamiltonian which is invariant under a rotation 
of the positional coordinates of all particles alone, and of 
their spins alone. This condition is satisfied for all the 
types of forces commonly considered in nonrelativistic 
nuclear theory (Majorana, Heisenberg, Wigner, Bartlett 
forces). . 

8 The importance of the approximate constancy of S 
for the interpretation of nuclear reactions was first recog- 
nized by Goldhaber, Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. 30, 361 (1934). 

9D. R. Inglis, Phys. Rev. 50, 783 (1936). 

10 This selection rule applies only to the interconversion 
of spin and orbital momentum; in y-ray emission, where 
magnetic dipole radiation can alter the spin, and probably 
in @-ray emission, transitions involving a change of S by 
one unit are hardly less probable than those leaving it 
unaltered. | 


RESONANCE IN TRANSMUTATIONS 


seems not unlikely that for nuclei of odd atomic 
weight the normal! states will have S=#, so that 
when these are bombarded by protons or 
neutrons, only singlet and triplet states of the 
compound nucleus will be formed. If states of 
even higher multiplicity were formed in such 
reactions, they would be almost stable against 
normal a-decay. 


II 


We shall now have to see in greater detail 
whether this explanation is tenable, and what 
implications it has for the pie pre ton of the 
reactions in question. 

The Ne?® formed by bombarding F!9 with 
protons has an excitation energy of more than 
12 Mev. We should thus expect the singlet states, 
‘which can decay to O'%+He?’, to have a short 
lifetime, since the a-particles emitted have so 
great an energy that the effects of the potential 
barrier will be negligible.!! Since, for instance, for 
the heavier and less highly excited nucleus P*! 
formed from Al?’?+ He’, the breadth of the levels 
is ~ 10° v, we would expect for the singlet levels of 
Ne®?, T~T.~105— 108 v. This breadth is so large 
that from such states we should surely expect 
no marked resonance in the yield of long range 
a-particles. For triplet states of Ne? the long 
range a-emission will be slowed up by (c/v)4, so 
that here [,’~100 v. In order to account on 
the basis of reaction (2b’) for the fact! that the 
y-ray yields at ~1 Mev are at least ten times 
the total long range a-particle yield, we should 
thus have to assume a value of I’, ~1000 v. This 
value is far larger than any which have been 
found for nuclear y-rays, and at least 100 times 
that necessary to account for the far more 
energetic y-ray of the simpler nucleus Bez’. 
Moreover, the fact that the y-ray spectrum 
consists only of. radiation quite near 6 Mev 
could on this basis be explained only quite arti- 
ficially. We are thus led to consider the possi- 
bility that O' has triplet states lying about 6 


11 Since Po>>Tp, and Ty, varies slowly with bombarding 
energy, the interpretation “of the rapid rise (faster than 1) 
of the yield in this reaction given in reference (2) cannot 
be right. If this more rapid rise should be confirmed, one 
would have to understand it in terms of a residual structure 
for the singlet levels, or a contribution from high-lying 
triplet levels, of the compound nucleus. 

2, McMillan, Phys. Rev. 46, 868 (1934). 


281 


Mev above ground, and that the reaction which 


successfully competes with the emission of long 


range a-particles is the emission of slow a-par- 
ticles, without spin change, but with so low an 
energy that the level breadth T’,”’, though larger 
than I’, is still small enough to give sharp 
resonances (100 v<I,’’<10,000 v). Experimen- 
tally one knows that at bombarding energies 
~ 400 kv there are no short range a-particles of 
energy > 2 Mev emitted;’ and for this process to 
compete successfully with the long range a-emis- 
sion, the energy of the particles cannot be far 
less than 1.5 Mev. A value in this neighborhood 
is consistent with the energy balance. If this 
suggestion is correct, one would expect the ratio 
l,/’/T,’ to increase rapidly with energy; and 
for the lowest resonance level (~330 kv) it 
would seem possible that seme long range a- 
particles could be observed. The absence of 


_ other lines in the y-ray spectrum cculd then be 


interpreted in a natural way because of the 
absence of low-lying excited states in the ‘‘closed 
shell”? nucleus O1. 

In the case of the B!!+H! reactions, one will 
again expect that the I. for C™ in singlet states 
will be large, and that with an increase in bom- 
barding energy the yield in (3a) will increase 
smoothly with I,. Again one will make a triplet 
C” responsible for the y-ray emission and the 
long range a-particles which show marked reso- 
nance. But here there is a point which calls for 
further explanation: why is the ratio of long to 
short range a-particles so much smaller for C4” 
than for Cz’? Since for the low resonance energy 
the reaction (3a) is far more probable than (3b), 
and since the long range a-particles are not iso- 
tropically distributed in direction," it seems 
reasonable to assume that Cy” is formed by 
capture of an s-proton, and is odd, and that 
Cz" is formed by -capture, and is even. If the 
normal state of B!! were a ?P state, C4” would 
then be an odd !P state; and Cz” an even °D 
state, so that both states could give both 
a-particle reactions, and one could expect no 
great difference in the relative yields. If however 
normal B" is a 7D, then Cy” is an odd 'D, and 
this cannot disintegrate into a normal Be%(1S) 
and an unexcited a-particle at all, whereas Cz”, 


13 Neuert, Physik. Zeits. 38, 122 (1937). 


282 A. C. G. MITCHELL 
in an even triplet state can. We wish therefore to 
suggest this interpretation, which is hardly in 
serious conflict with the calculations based on 
a Hartree model, according to which the 2D of 
B" is only ~2.5 mc? higher than the ?P. Accord- 
ing to this view the resonance reaction may 
contribute also to the short range a-particles, 
and the small yield from this reaction must be 
ascribed to the smallness of I’, for a p-proton at 
these low energies. 

With the Li reactions, one point remains a 
little puzzling if one accepts the usual interpre- 
tation: since normal Li’ is almost certainly odd, 
the long range a-reaction must be ascribed to 
the capture of a p-proton, the Be z® to that of an 
s-proton. The fact that the long range a-reaction 


14 Feenberg and Wigner, Phys. Rev. 51, 95 (1937); 
Feenberg and Phillips, Phys. Rev. 51, 597 (1937). 


AUGUST 15, 1937 


PHYSICAL REVIEW 


AND R. N. VARNEY 


comes from p-capture may in part account! for 
the smallness of the a-particle yield compared to 
that of the reaction Li®+H!-He?+ He. One 
would now expect that if the Be,4® could be 
formed in a 1D state, the corresponding a-par- 
ticles should be distributed in angle with marked 
anisotropy; and the fact that the observed dis- 
tribution'® seems to be isotropic suggests that 
such states contribute little to Be,® in the range 
of energies (~250 kv) investigated. This could 
then only be understood if the spacing of levels 
of different angular momentum in Be®, even at 
the high excitation of 17 Mev, were still large 
compared to the very considerable breadth of 
these levels. 

14 Compare M. Goldhaber, Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. 30, 
561 (1934). 


16 Kirchner, Physik. Zeits. 34, 785 (1933); Giarratana 
and Brennecke, Phys. Rev. 49, 35 (1936). 


VOLUME 52 


Neutron Scattering Cross Section as a Function of Energy 


ALLAN C. G. MITCHELL AND R. N. VARNEY 
Physics Department, New York University, University Heights, New York 


(Received June 9, 1937) 


The study of scattering of neutrons of energy range from 0.02 to 80 volts from Fe, Ni, and Pb 
has been completed by measuring the activation of Ag, Rh, and CHI; detectors. The scattering 
of C neutrons was determined indirectly by two methods, and the results agreed closely. The 
scattering cross section for Ni fell off slowly with neutron velocity, that for Pb increased 
slightly, while that for Fe remained constant over the range from 0.02 to 80 volts. The direc- 
tional distribution of neutrons emerging from the top of a paraffin cylinder containing a Ra—Be 
neutron source was investigated by placing detectors at various distances above the top of the 
paraffin. The results agreed well with those calculated for a cosine distribution law. 


PART I. SCATTERING Cross SECTION 


CONSIDERABLE amount of work has 

been done recently on the scattering of 
neutrons from various materials. Mitchell and 
Murphy! ? measured the scattering cross section 
for a number of elements, while Pontecorvo and 
Wick? measured the reflection of neutrons from 
several substances and calculated scattering 
cross sections for a few of these. Furthermore, 


1A. C. G. Mitchell and E. J. Murphy, Phys. Rev. 48, 
653 (1935); Mitchell, Murphy, and Langer, Phys. Rev. 
49, 400 (1936). 

2 oo Murphy, and Whitaker, Phys. Rev. 50, 133 
1936). , 

’B, Pontecorvo and G. C, Wick, Ricerca Scient. 1, 134, 

220 (1936). 


various materials sensitive to neutrons of differ- 
ent energies have been used as detectors. We 
have extended our experiments on the scattering 
of slow neutrons using various detectors and 
filter combinations so that we now have data on 
the scattering cross section of neutrons of ener- 
gies from 0.02 to 80 volts for several different 
scattering materials. 

The method used was that previously de- 
scribed with certain modifications which we shall 
show to be unessential. A cylindrical block of 
paraffin, 15 cm in diameter and 17 cm high, con- 
tained a source of neutrons located 6 cm from its 
top surface. Ag, Rh, and CHI; were used as 
detectors of the various groups of neutrons. 


