224 LETTERS TO 


TABLE I. Saturation of the ammonia (3,3) line in a rectangular guide. 


Relative saturation 


Incident power Experimental 
Milliwatts Theoretical Theoretical (ref. 3) 
2.7 X10-4 1.00 (1.00) 1.00 
5.5 X10-2 0.89 (0.88) 0.82 
5.5 X10-1 0.45 (0.43) 0.48 
§.3 0.10 (0.08) 0.08 


with the equation of Snyder and Richards is obtained if 
one assumes that only 62 percent of the collisions effective 
in broadening the absorption line also restore thermal 
equilibrium (see Table I, third column). 

The results of Pond and Cannon! are more difficult to 
interpret, because in their experiment the energy density 
varied strongly along the guide as well as on a cross section, 
due to the standing waves set up in the equipment. Still, 
from the magnitude of the effect one can estimate the 
relaxation time to be of the order of ten microseconds. 
This means that collision with the wall is the mechanism 
that re-establishes thermal equilibrium. Most of the width 
of the line is therefore due to a non-dissipative cause, the 
Doppler effect. The theory so far developed cannot be 
applied to interpret the experiment. One may notice, 
however, that over the 200-fold variation in incident power 
investigated by Pond and Cannon, the absorption coefh- 
cient varies inversely as the cube root of the power. 
Hence, this is the transition region from constant absorp- 
tion coefficient (low power level) to constant total power 
absorbed (high power level). It is somewhat surprising 
that the transition is so gradual. 

To summarize, then: the data on the saturation of ab- 
sorption lines broadened only by intermolecular collisions 
are in agreement with a theory which treats Zeeman com- 
ponents as independent contributors to the absorption and 
assumes that all collisions restore thermal equilibrium. 

* U.S. Rubber Company, Predoctoral Fellow. 

1T. A. Pond and W. F. Cannon, Phys. Rev. 72, 1121 (1947). 

2B, Bleaney and R. P. Penrose, Proc. Phys. Soc. 60, 83 (1948). 

3R. L. Carter and W. V. Smith, Phys. Rev. 73, 1053 (1948). 

4C, H. Townes, Phys. Rev. 70, 665 (1946). 

5H. S. Snyder and P. I. Richards, Phys. Rev. 73, 1178 (1948). 


6 R. Karplus and J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 73, 1020 (1948). 
7R. Karplus, Phys. Rev. 73, 1120 (1948). 


On Infinite Field Reactions in Quantum 
Field Theory 


SIN-ITIRO TOMONAGA 
Physics Institute, Tokyo Bunrika Daigaku, Tokyo, Japan 
June 1, 1948 


N interpreting the level-shift of the hydrogen atom in 
terms of the radiative reaction, Bethe! proposed a 
method of dealing with this problem without touching the 
inherent divergency of the current quantum field theory. 
By his theory it has become possible to treat the problem 
involving field reactions for the first time in close con- 
nection with the reliable experimental data. On the other 


THE EDITOR 


hand, Lewis? and Epstein? analyzed the infinities occurring 
in the radiative correction to the scattering cross-section 
of an electron in an external field of force and found that 
also these infinities could be got over by means of a pro- 
cedure similar to Bethe’s. In a recent issue of the PHYSICAL 
REvIEw, Schwinger‘ pointed out that in these problems 
the method of canonical transformation was useful, by 
which the separation from the fields of the parts belonging 
to free photons and non-radiating electrons was per- 
formed, a method which can be regarded as a relativistic 
generalization of the procedure used by Bloch and Nord- 
sieck5 as well as by Pauli and Fierz® in the discussions 
about the self-field of an electron. 

Almost the same line of attack was taken independently 
of these American authors also by our Tokyo group and 
some results are now in course of publication in our English 
journal, Progress of Theoretical Physics. Under the un- 
favorable conditions after wartime, however, it will be a 
long time before these papers will appear in print. So I 
should like to give here a brief summary of the state and 
views of our investigations. 

We first treated the effect of field reactions in the colli- 
sion problem on the f-field theory of Pais’—or the C-meson 
theory of Sakata,’ which had been developed by Sakata 
independently of Pais—intending to examine whether this 
theory which had been put forward aiming at the elimina- 
tion of the infinity occurring in the self-energy of charged 
particles, was also capable of cancelling out the infinity 
occurring in the scattering cross section of an electron. 
We found that this was really the case: the f-field was 
proved capable of compensating one part of the infinite 
reactions of the radiation field in this phenomenon. The 
other part of infinities, that is, of the positron theoretical 
origin, however, could not be eliminated by introducing 
this new field.® 

Then the above mentioned work of Bethe appeared. 
We tried!° to formulate Bethe’s procedure in a mathe- 
matically more closed form by using a relativistic gen- 
eralization of the canonical transformation of Pauli and 
Fierz. By this transformation an infinite term could be 
separated in the Hamiltonian density, and this term, we 
found, had the same form as the mass term in the Dirac 
equation, being bilinear in y* and y. Because of its struc- 
ture this infinite term can be amalgamated into the mass 
term of the Dirac equation and one can reinterpret the 
electron mass in such a way that the compound mass is 
just what we observe, corresponding to the idea of Bethe. 
This procedure violates neither the invariance of the 
theory nor the integrability condition of the generalized 
Schrédinger equation." In order to investigate the effective- 
ness of this amalgamation of infinity into the electron 
mass, we applied the method to the problem lying close 
at our hand, i.e., the radiative correction to the scattering 
cross section of an electron.” We found this amalgamation 
was in fact effective in eliminating the non-positron theo- 
retical infinity in this problem, a fact that was pointed 
out independently by Lewis. It was also shown that the 
infinity of the positron theoretical origin could be elimi- 
nated by reinterpreting the scattering external potential 
or by reinterpreting the electron charge. 


LETTERS TO 

The result of the canonical transformation shows on the 
other hand that there occurs an infinity of another type, a 
term containing electromagnetic potential bilinearly. Be- 
cause of this structure this infinity is to be attributed to 
the vacuum polarization effect. In order to see the role to 
be played by this effect in collision phenomena we analyzed 
the infinities occurring in the e?-correction to the Klein- 
Nishina formula. In this problem, we found, besides the 
infinities of the types mentioned above, an infinity which 
is closely related to the above mentioned vacuum effect. 
Infinity of this kind can be, in fact, driven away from the 
cross section when we substract beforehand the infinite 
term of the vacuum type from the Hamiltonian. But for 
this subtraction we cannot find a reasoning so natural and 
plausible as that used in the case of mass-type and charge- 
type infinities, where the subtraction was considered as an 
amalgamation. This is because it would necessarily result 
in a drastic change of the Maxwell equation for the 
radiation. 

A way out of this difficulty was suggested :“ it might be 
possible to introduce some fields which would give rise to 
the vacuum effect with the opposite sign so that a com- 
pensation method similar to the f-field theory might be 
used here. In fact, one finds, applying the same method, 
that a Pauli-Weisskopf field has this property.4® An 
alternative possibility is to consider, in the style of Dirac’s 
theory of the classical electron, that the ‘original equation”’ 
for the radiation contained, in the same way as the “‘origi- 
nal mass” of the electron, in itself an infinity with the 
opposite sign so that, supplemented with the infinity 
appearing as the result of the interaction, the equation for 
the observable field becomes just of the Maxwellian form. 

The calculation of the level-shift of a bound electron 
was also undertaken.!* This work is not yet completed but 
it was confirmed that the result converges by virtue of our 
subtraction prescription. We found further, in agreement 
with Schwinger, that a part of the radiative correction to 
the energy can be interpreted as caused by an anomalous 
moment of the electron the existence of which had been 
expected by Breit.!” 

We hope that various postwar difficulties will soon be 
settled and that our results will appear in print in the 
near future. 


1H, A. Bethe, Phys. Rev. 72, 339 (1947). 

2H. W. Lewis, Phys. Rev. 73, 173 (1948). 

3S. T. Epstein, Phys. Rev. 73, 177 (1948). 

4]. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 73, 415 (1948). 

5 F, Bloch and A. Nordsieck, Phys. Rev. 52, 54 (1937). 

6 W. Pauli and M. Fierz, Nuovo Cimiento, 15, No. 3, 1 (1938). 

7A. Pais, Phys. Rev. 68, 227 (1946). 

8S, Sakata, Prog. Theor. Phys. 2, 30 (1947). 

a ve ray Z. Koba and S. Tomonaga, Prog. Theor. Phys. 2, 216, 217 

.) (1947). 

10 T, Tati and S. Tomonaga, lecture at the symposium on the theory 
of elementary particles, Nov. 1947. Full account of this lecture will be 
published in Progress of Theoretical Physics. 

u S,. Tomonaga, Prog. Theor. Phys. 1, 27 (1946); Z. Koba, T. Tati 
and S. Tomonaga, Prog. Theor. Phys. 2, 101, 198 (1947). 

127, Koba and S. Tomonaga, Prog. Theor. Phys. 2, 218 (L) (1947). 

13 Z, Koba and G. Takeda, appearing in Prog. Theor. Phys. 

14M. Taketani, private conversation. 

15K. Baba, M. Sasaki and R. Suzuki, to be published in Prog. 
Theor. Phys. It was first pointed out by Sakata and Umesawa in the 
Nagoya University that the Pauli-Weisskopf field gives rise to a posi- 
tive self-energy of a photon in contrast to a negative one due to the 
electron field and this would result in the compensation of the vacuum 
effect mentioned above. __ 

18 Y, Nambu, to be published in Prog. Theor. Phys. 

17 G. Breit, Phys. Rev. 72, 984 (1947). 


THE EDITOR 225 


Note on the Above Leiter: In transmitting to the Physical 
Review the accompaning review by Tomonaga of the re- 
markable work carried out in Japan in recent years, there 
is one technical note that may be helpful. 

Tomonaga remarks in the fifth paragraph from the end 
that in addition to the infinite terms which may be recog- 
nized as contributions to mass and charge, there are other 
infinities which appear, particularly in the corrections to 
the Klein-Nishina formula. These have to do with the 
familiar problem of the light quantum self-energy. As long 
experience and the recent discussions of Schwinger and 
others have shown, the very greatest care must be taken 
in evaluating such self-energies lest, instead of the zero 
value which they should have, they give non-gauge co- 
variant, non-covariant, in general infinite results. From 
manuscripts kindly sent by Tomonaga, I would conclude 
that the difficulties referred to in this note result from an 
insufficiently cautious treatment, and therefore inadequate 
identification, of light quantum self-energies. 


J. R. OPPENHEIMER 
Institute for Advanced Study 
Princeton, New Jersey 


The Absorption of Cosmic Radiation 
in Meteorites 


CarRL AuGUST BAUER 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 
May 26, 1948 


PREVIOUS letter! showed that cosmic radiation has 
produced an appreciable amount of the helium found 
in metallic meteorites. Since the rate of helium production 
is directly proportional to the intensity of the cosmic 
radiation, the radial variation of this cosmic-ray helium 
within a spherical iron meteorite can be calculated from 
the radial variation in the intensity of primary cosmic 
radiation. 
If No and N(r) are, respectively, the number of primary 
cosmic-ray particles passing through a unit sphere (cross 


Pe) a es | ee cane 
ie Sa ee ee ee Re Ne 
ae? a ae | a | 
) 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 


Distonce from center in cm 


Fic, 1. The radial variation in the intensity of primary cosmic 
radiation (or in the relative helium content) in spherical iron meteorites 
of vapeue masses. The numbers at the top of the curves are log mass 
in kg. 


