Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scie 


Routledge 


Taylor & Francis Group 


z 
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 


taouse ty Sana Deepens nd Fron Poy ISSN: 0096-3402 (Print) 1938-3282 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rbul20 


In the Keeping of Unreason 


J. Robert Oppenheimer 


To cite this article: J. Robert Oppenheimer (1960) In the Keeping of Unreason, Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scientists, 16:1, 18-22, DOI: 10.1080/00963402.1960.11454041 


To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/00963402.1960.11454041 


sea Published online: 15 Sep 2015. 
NJ 

(g Submit your article to this journal @ 
N 

ey View related articles 


we Citing articles: 2 View citing articles @ 


Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at 
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=rbul20 


J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER 


J. Robert Oppenheimer is Director of the Insti- 
tute for Advanced Study, at Princeton, New Jer- 
sey. This article was given at a seminar on “Indus- 
trial Society and the Western Political Dialogue,” 
held by the Congress for Cultural Freedom at 
Rheinfelden, Switzerland, September 20-27, 1959. 


In the Keeping of Unreason 


N THESE remarks I shall address myself to one of 
I the questions raised in Raymond Aron’s paper:* 

If, outside the sphere of science, there is nothing but 
arbitrary decision, has the result of the progress of science 
and scientific reasoning merely been to place in the keeping 
of unreason the thing that concerns us most, that is to say, 
the definition and choice of the essential, of the good life, 
of the good society? 

What I have to say is really intended as an introduc- 
tion. On the one hand, the problems of political philos- 
ophy are, for all the general human weight of this branch 
of study, highly technical in themselves, and I must leave 
to the many here who are experts the expert discussion of 
this field. On the other hand, I will perhaps talk a little 
more broadly, because my concern is not only with how 
we can hope to see a revival of political philosophy, but 
with a rather larger question: how can we hope to see 
a revival of all philosophy? Aron’s question says “the 
choice of the essential”; that is, after all, what a culti- 
vated skeptic says when he means metaphysics; the choice 
of “the good life”: that is what the cultivated skeptic 
means when he thinks ethics; and “the good society” is 
then the subject of political philosophy. I also must ad- 
mit that nothing that I see in terms of action can in this 
area have immediate effects. If I were to have the only 

1 The terms of reference of the discussion were contained in a 


paper by Raymond Aron from which the above quotation was 
drawn, and which was also presented at the same seminar. 


18 


word on this subject, we would not walk out of these 
doors having solved any problem, or having any right to 
look forward to any morrow in which all the situations 
which are now troublesome would suddenly be bright. I 
do have the impression that we are here dealing with 
deep and only partially understood and only partially 
manageable human attitudes, where a small beginning of 
clarity and common understanding may have great fruits 
if it is firm and solid enough. The question that I am go- 
ing to concern myself with is the relations between the 
scientific explosions of this age and the weight and the 
excellence that we may hope to achieve in common 
discourse. 

In this, I have in mind an image of common discourse 
which is itself blurred by three related realities. One is 
the size of our world and its communities—the number 
of people involved. One is the generally egalitarian and 
inclusive view in which there are no a priori restrictions 
on who is to participate in the discourse; clearly, not 
everyone will; but I think it is of the essence of the 
Wester hope that every one may. The third is the 
extraordinary rapidity with which the preoccupations 
and circumstances of our life are altered. 


A Universal Ideal 


What I am concerned with is an ideal, an image of 
a part of human life which is inherently not all-inclu- 


sive, but which has a quality of being public—I do not 
mean governmental, but universal—which speaks in 
terms intelligible to all, of things accessible to all, of 
meanings relevant to all. I would not, for instance, say 
that the microbiologists belong to this public sector. 
They talk of problems which they understand, in which 
they can communicate without ambiguity, in which they 
can discover what errors may have been made, and can 
rejoice, as, believe me, they do rejoice, in all discoveries 
which add to their insight, irrespective of who, where, 
and to whose glory the discoveries were made. 

I would not regard the moder painter as part of the 
public sector, and certainly not those advanced and ex- 
perimental elements of the art of musical composition, 
where, I have been led to believe, these men, as in the 
pure mathematician’s art, are concerned with a very high 
purpose—that of preserving the vigor and integrity and 
life of their own skills—but are not, in the first instance, 
addressing themselves to man at large. As to our friends 
the radical composers, I would be gladly corrected by 
experts; but I will take some correction. 

This image of the public sector has suffered from all 
the circumstances I have mentioned: size, egalitarian- 
ism, growth, change; but it has also suffered from a 
cognitive development, which is the growth of science. 
I would like to make a few comments on the nature of 
the relations between rational discourse, culminating in 
philosophical discourse on the one hand, and the devel- 
opment of science on the other. I am very much guided 
- by my own experience, limited experience, in the United 
States; and when I talk, I will think of our universities, 
of our symposia like this one, of our mass culture, of the 
way in which Americans use their leisure, of what is 
thought, and written, and done in the country I know 
best. 


Dangers and Hopes 

For this provincialism, I make only the following two 
excuses: it is what I know at first hand; I am very dis- 
trustful of the traveller’s impressions of other countries. 
But more important, it seems to me that in the United 
States we have perhaps come first to the era in which 
production for consumption’s sake has reached a kind of 
completeness; I am aware that it is not fully complete, 
but it is from the point of view of men at large nearly 
so. We are also among the first to face the problem of 
what does one do with the leisure and the life so re- 
turned, what is it for, how does one spend it. I under- 
stand that in Europe, where egalitarianism is less strong, 
where the intellectual tradition and the need for order 
is more strong, the problems, as they appear in our 
country, are slightly less advanced and less acute. I sus- 
pect, though I would gladly be told that I was wrong 
by historians or prophets, that the American troubles 
are forerunners of troubles which will not long remain 


out of Europe. I do not believe these troubles are as 
acute in Communist countries, even in Russia. The tech- 
nological revolution is not as far along; the land of 
plenty is not as near; and, in addition, the unifying 
presence of tyranny has greatly affected, not the nature 
of intellectual activity in those domains where it is free, 
but the contours of the regions where intellectual activ- 
ity as such can be free. Therefore, I believe that in 
studying the American scene, we may be reminded not 
how to do things, not what to do all over the world 
in the same way, but of some of the dangers and some 
of the hopes which accompany the fulfillment of the 
basic premises of the industrial and technological revo- 
lution. 

I need hardly bring to mind that the great sciences 
of today arose in philosophical discourse and in technical 
invention. It will be an unending dispute among his- 
torians as to the role of these two components, but all 
of natural science—and I find myself thinking of his- 
torical science as continuous with natural science—has 
its Origins in an undifferentiated, unspecialized, common 
human discourse. The question is, therefore, why the 
enormous but unanticipated, not fully appreciated, and 
at the moment not fully realized—perhaps never to be 
fully realized—success of one sort of intellectual activity 
should not have had a beneficial effect on the intellec- 
tual life of man. In some ways it has, because certain 
forms of extreme superstition, certain insistent ways of 
provincialism have found themselves unable to flourish 
in the presence of the new light of scientific discovery. 


But if we think back to the early days, either of the 
European tradition or of modern society, we see that 
we were there dealing with relatively few people. The 
citizenry of Athens, the few handsful of men who con- 
cerned themselves with the structure of American politi- 
cal power, the participants in the eighteenth-century En- 
lightenment from Montesquieu up to the Revolution 
were relatively few men. They had before them a rela- 
tively well digested and common language, experience, 


19 


and tradition and a common basis of knowledge. It is 
true that already in the eighteenth century, physics, as- 
tronomy, and mathematics were beginning to assume 
these specialized and abstract and unfamiliar aspects 
which have increasingly characterized these subjects up 
to the present day. But they were not beyond the reach 
of laymen. They were perhaps greeted by laymen with 
an enthusiasm which a fuller knowledge would not have 
supported, but they were part of the converse of the 
eighteenth century. 


A New Situation 


If we look today, we see a very different situation, 
an alienation between the world of science and the world 
of public discourse, which has emasculated, impover- 
ished, and intimidated the world of public discourse 
without any countervailing advantage, except to the 
specialized sciences, and which in a strange sense, to 
use a word which political scientists have taught me, 
has denied to public discourse an element of legitimacy 
and has given it a kind of arbitrary, unrooted, unfounded 
quality. Thus any man may say what he thinks, but there 
is no way of arriving at a clarification or a consensus. 
In the past, common discourse and its queen, philoso- 
phy, rested on an essentially common basis of knowl- 
edge; that is, the men who participated knew, by and 
large, the same things, and could talk of them with a 
reasonable limitation in the ambiguity of what they 
were saying. There was a relatively stable and a deeply 
shared tradition, an historic experience which was com- 
mon among the participants in the conversation, and a 
recognition—not always explicit and, in fact, often de- 
nied—of a difference between the kind of use and value 
which public discourse has as its high ideal, and the 
kind of criteria by which the sciences themselves in part 
must judge themselves. I want to say here that the traits 
which are important in public discourse are enormously 
important in science; and a lack of recognition of this 
has created great blocks, great repugnancies on the part 
of humane, cultivated, and earnest men in their appre- 
ciation of the natural sciences and of even the abstract 
sciences. 

I speak of a recognition that there are things impor- 
tant to discuss and analyze, to explore, to subject to 
some logical surgery, to have in order, in a certain sense: 
things which are not best viewed as propositional truth, 
which are not assertions, verifiable by the characteristic 
methods of science, as to the existence in the world of 
this or that connection between one thing and another. 
They have rather a normative and thematic quality. 
Such, indeed, is the intention of this discussion. They 
assert the connectedness of things, the relatedness of 
things, the priority of things; and without them there 
would be no science; without them there could be no 


20 


order in human life. But they do not say that the value 
of a certain constant—measuring the elementary electric 
charge in rational units—is 137.037, and challenge you 
to see what is the next decimal point. They permit no 
analogous verification. 


Speaking the Truth 


The logical positivists, who have been so much 
damned, have recognized the special circumstances in 
the natural sciences which, in an enormous renunciation 
of meaning and limitation of scope, have permitted a 
special definition of truth, and they pre-empt the word 
truth for that. I do not mind that. I do not insist that 
the poet speaks the truth; he speaks something equally 
important. He may, but very seldom, speak the truth: 
he speaks meanings, and he speaks order. Thematic, as 
opposed to propositional, discourse is the typical func- 
tion of the public sector of our lives, which is where law 
arises, morality, and the highest forms of art. It is not 
best construed, though it can occasionally be construed, 
as assertions of fact about the natural order or the human 
order. It is best construed as assertions of experience, 
of dedication, of commitment. 

We all know how great is the gulf between the intel- 
lectual world of the scientist, and the intellectual world, 
hardly existing today, of public discourse on fundamen- 
tal human problems. One of the reasons is that the sci- 
entific life of man which, in my opinion, constitutes an 
unparalleled example of our power and our virtuosity 
and our dedication, has grown both quantitatively and 
qualitatively in ways which, to Pythagoras and Plato, 
would have seemed very, very strange, and even nefari- 
ous, and which cast a shadow over Newton’s later years, 
as he saw what might come. Purcell, who is a professor of 
physics at Harvard, said a year or two ago, “ninety per 
cent of all scientists are alive;” this is a vivid reminder 
of the quantitative growth of scientific activity. A friend 
of ours, a historian, much concerned with Hellenistic and 
sixteenth- and seventeenth-century science, did himself a 
small exercise—to plot, as a function of time, the number 
of people engaged in the acquisition of new knowledge, 
which is a definition of science. It is, for about the past 
200 years, an exponential function of the time, and the 
characteristic period is ten years. A similar plot of the 
publications in science follows the same law. 

Now you may say that all of this is junk—that there 
are a few great discoveries, a few great principles, that 
anyone can master and understand, and that all these 
details are really not of any great importance in human 
life. Of course, many of the details are not; they are not 
even of importance in the life of the sciences. But, by 
and large, men do not devote their lives without some 
reason; and men will not suffer the publication of things 
which are trivial, derivative, or irrelevant. We make 
mistakes, but, by and large, the volume of publication 


is a rather accurate professional judgment of what needs 
to be known in order to get on. And I ask you to believe 
me that in this growth there are insights, there are spec- 
tacles of order and harmony, of subtlety, of wonder, 
which are comparable to the great discoveries of which 
we leamed in school. I ask you also to believe me that 
they are not easily communicated in terms of today’s 
ordinary experience and tongue. They rest on traditions, 
some of which are very old, involving experience and 
language that has been cherished, refined, corrected, 
sometimes for centuries, sometimes for decades. And 
that is one reason why, if you were to ask me what are 
the fundaments of science—“‘if you tell me that one clue, 
I will tell you the rest”—I could not respond. This is 
partly because sciences are ramified; they deal with dif- 
ferent kinds of harmony, and none of them can be 
completely reduced to others. They are in themselves 
a plural and multiple reflection of reality. 

But it is partly also that the principles which are 
general and which, from the logical point of view, imply 
a great deal about the natural order of the world, have 
had to be couched in terms which themselves have had 
a long human history of definition, refinement, and 
subtilization. If you were to ask me what is the great 
law of the behavior of atoms, not as we now talk about 
them, but as they were talked about in the early years 
of this century, I could certainly write it on the black- 
board and it would not occupy much space; but to give 
some sense of what it is all about would be for me a 
very great chore, and for you a very eamest and unfa- 
miliar experience. 

The ramification is also a thing which is hard to ap- 
preciate outside the practitioners. We do not, in the 
fields of science, know each other very well. There are 
many crosslinkages. There are, as far as I know, no 
threats of contradiction. There is a pervasive relevance 
of everything to everything else. There are analogies, 
largely formal, mathematical analogies, which stretch as 
far as from things like language to things like heat 
engines. But there is no logical priority of one science 
over another. There is no deduction of the facts of liv- 
ing matter from the facts of physics. ‘There is simply an 
absence of contradiction. And the criteria of order, of 
harmony, of generality, and of coherence, which are as 
much a part of science as the rectitude of observations 
and the correctness of logical manipulation—these cri- 
teria are sui generis from science to science. The world 
of life does not regard as simple what the physicist thinks 
of as simple; and the other way round. The order of 
simplicity, the order of nature, is different. 


Discourse Discouraged 


In addition to this, the sense of openness, to some 
extent of accident, of incompleteness, of infinity, which 
the study of nature brings, is of course very discouraging 


to public discourse, because it is impossible to get it all, 
it is impossible to master it, it is impossible to summarize 
it, it is impossible to close it off. It is a growing thing, 
the ends of which are probably co-extensive with the 
ends of civilized human life. 

This is a set of circumstances which has largely de- 
prived our public discourse of its first requirement: a 
common basis of knowledge. I will not say what bad 
effects it may have had on philosophical discourse—that 
a whole category of human achievement which grew 
from philosophy and invention is shut off from the 
thoughts of the philosophers and of ordinary men. I will 
not say with certainty whether, in excluding this kind 
of order, and this kind of verifiability, one has not im- 
poverished the discourse; I believe that one has. But in 
any case, it is a very hard thing, as I know from other 
examples, to talk about our situation and to have to say 
“T leave out, I leave aside, I leave as irrelevant, some- 
thing which is as large, as central, as humane, and as 
moving a part of the human intellectual history as the 
development of the sciences themselves.” 

I believe that this is not an easy problem. I believe 
that it is not possible to have everyone well informed 
about what goes on, to have a completely common basis 
of knowledge. We do not have it ourselves in the sci- 
ences—far from it. I have the most agonizing troubles, 
and I would say on the whole fail, when I try to know 
what the contemporary mathematicians are doing and 
why. I leam with wonder, but as an outsider and an 
amateur, what the biochemists and the biophysicists are 
up to. But I have one advantage, and that is that there 
is a small part of one subject that I know well enough 
to have deep in me the sense of knowledge and of ig- 
norance. And just this is perhaps not wholly unattain- 
able in a much wider scale. It is perhaps not wholly out 
of the question to restore to all of us a good conscience 
about our reason, by virtue of the fact that we are in 
touch with some of its most difficult, brilliant, and lovely 
operations. 


The Ethical Dilemma 


As to the question of a stable, shared tradition, I have 
of course been talking about philosophy in a predomi- 
nantly secular culture. I have not included as part of 
the sources of tradition a living revelation, or a living 
ecclesiastical authority. It is not so much that I wish 
to exclude it; but if our deliberations are to have gen- 
eral contemporary meaning, they must take into account 
the fact that our culture is secular and may well have 
to develop as a secular culture. Our tradition, strong 
though it is—and I think the European tradition may 
vie with the Chinese and the Indian in this respect— 
is buffeted by the eruption of change. You are all aware 
of how unprepared we were for the tragedies of the twen- 
tieth century when it opened, and how bitter, corrosive, 


21 


and indigestible many of them have been. I think primar- 
ily of the two world wars and the totalitarian revolutions. 
But take one example. We certainly live in the heritage 
of a Christian tradition. Many of us are believers; but 
none of us is immune from the injunctions, the hopes, 
and the order of Christianity. I find myself profoundly 
in anguish over the fact that no ethical discourse of any 
nobility or weight has been addressed to the problem 
of the atomic weapons. There has been much prudential 
discussion, much strategic discussion, and game theory. 
This is recent, and I welcome it, because as little as five 
or seven years ago, there was no discussion of any kind; 
that was certainly worse. But what are we to make of a 
civilization which has always regarded ethics as an essen- 
tial part of human life, and which has always had in 
it an articulate, deep, fervent conviction, never perhaps 
held by the majority, but never absent: a dedication to 
“ahinsa,” the Sanskrit word that means “doing no harm 
or hurt,” which you find in Jesus—as well as, of course, 
the opposite—and clearly and simply in Socrates. What 
ate we to think of such a civilization, which has not 
been able to talk about the prospect of killing almost 
everybody, except in prudential and game-theoretic 
terms? Of course, people do: thus Lord Russell writes, 
as do others; but these people want heaven and earth 
too. They are not in any way talking about deep ethical 
dilemmas, because they deny that there are such dilem- 
mas. They say that if we behave in a nice way, we will 
never get into any trouble. But that, surely, is not ethics. 

I, of course, am not now very deep in these things. 
In 1945, in 1949, and perhaps now, there have been 
crucial moments in which the existence of a public 
philosophical discourse, not aimed at the kind of proof 
which the mathematicians give, not aimed at the kind 
of verifiability which the biologists have, but aimed at 
the understanding of the meaning, of the intent, and of 
the commitment of men and at their reconciliation and 
analysis, could have made a great difference in the 
moral climate and the human scope of our times. I 
would go only so far; that is to say that in all those 
instances in which the West, notably my own country, 
has expressed the view that there was no harm in using 
the super weapons, provided only that they were used 
against an antagonist who had done some wrong, we 
have been in error; and that our lack of scruple, which 
grew historically out of the strategic campaigns of the 
Second World War, the total character of that war, and 
the numbing and indifference of which responsible peo- 
ple like Mr. Stimson complained bitterly, has been a 
very great disservice to the cause of freedom and of free 
men. 


The Role of Certitude 


And as to the third of the pre-conditions of public 
discourse and of philosophy, this, I think, has to do with 


22 


an overemphasis characteristic of the Renaissance, and 
natural after Scholasticism, of the role of certitude. If 
we think of most of Plato, we can hardly imagine a more 
useful exploration of the central ideas of high Athenian 
culture. Plato does not end his discussions with any 
summary; in that respect, they may be a model for ours. 
And the purpose is not the attainment of certainty, the 
purpose is the exploration of meaning. The purpose is. 
the exploration of what men wish, intend, hope, cherish, 
love, and are prepared to do. My belief is that if the 
common discourse can be enriched by a more tolerant 
and humane welcome for the growth of science, its. 
knowledge, its intellectual virtue—I am not now speak- 
ing of machinery, for this is another problem—it may 
be more easily possible to accept the role of clarification 
and of commitment which is the true purpose of phi- 
losophy, and not to hang around its neck that dread, 
dead bird, “How can you be sure?” which has, I believe, 
stunted philosophy, even in its great modem days, and 
which has driven it actually almost out of existence at 
the present moment. 

I would think that we could look to a future in which, 
very high on the list of the purposes of consumption 
and leisure, was knowledge and thought, a future in 
which the intellectual vigor of man had a greater scope 
than at any time in history, and in which, to quote what 
Mr. Eugene Rostow said, man is free to love, to live, 
and to know. It is, I think, no accident that the optim- 
istic view of the present, and especially of the American 
present, came from Rostow. For in the Common Law, 
in our country at least, you see that the common basis. 
of knowledge, the stable shared tradition, and the rec- 
ognition of the importance of non-propositional knowl- 
edge, are all highly characteristic hallmarks of this suc- 
cessful community. I believe that it is largely, of course 
not wholly, through living, which is so deeply the func- 
tion of the arts, and through knowing, which is largely 
the function of the sciences, that the function of the phi- 
losopher, which is loving, can be most richly supported. 

I know that, technically, the questions I have raised 
are formidable in a most discouraging way: how are we 
to lear a little more of what goes on in this world, and 
to be satisfied with understanding, in places where certi- 
tude is unattainable? I think we may regard the explora- 
tion of these questions as quite beyond the scope of 
our discussions here. I am not very wise about them; 
but I am deeply sure of one thing, and that is that they 
require effort and discipline and dedication, and that, in 
the measure in which we come to understand the reasons 
for this, we may also find ways of doing it. I find it hard 
to believe that with the greatest intellectual activity 
of all time taking place in the next room, catholic, pub- 
lic, common understanding will be possible unless we 
open the doors. 


