Bulletin of the 5d Routledge 
2 Taylor & Francis Group 


Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 


ISSN: 0096-3402 (Print) 1938-3282 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rbul20 


Physics in the Contemporary World 


J. Robert Oppenheimer 


To cite this article: J. Robert Oppenheimer (1948) Physics in the Contemporary World, Bulletin of 
the Atomic Scientists, 4:3, 65-86, DOI: 10.1080/00963402.1948.11460172 


To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00963402.1948.114601 72 


sea Published online: 15 Sep 2015. 
NJ 

(g Submit your article to this journal @ 
N 

ey View related articles 


we Citing articles: 1 View citing articles @ 


Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at 
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=rbul20 


Download by: [ECU Libraries] Date: 03 July 2017, At: 12:20 


Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scientists 


Volume 4 Number 3 


Editors 


H. H. Goldsmith 
Eugene Rabinowitch 


Assistant Editors 
Alice Smith, Ruth Shils 


Editorial Assistant 
Virginia Penn 


Editorial Board 
T. H. Davies, H. H. Goldsmith, Clyde 
A. Hutchison, Jr., Eugene Rabino- 
witch, Edward A. Shils, Edward Teller 


In This Issue 


Physics in the Contemporary 
World 
by J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Scientists and Social Responsibility....69 
by P. W. Bridgman 


Comments on Dr. Bridgman's Paper....72 


Atomic Energy in the News............0.. 7 


Report on AEC Patent Problems.......... 77 
by Byron S, Miller 


Letter to the Editors... 
by Abram V. Martin 


What Should the Atomic Scientists 


by Richard L. Meier 


United Nations Atomic Energy News..83 
by Peter Kihss 


Opinions on Atomic Energy from the 
Netherlands ..........csscssscccsseccnessnscsseessees 


The Atomic Energy Commission 
Reports to the Congress 


Report of the Congressional 
Joint Committee 


Published monthly by the Atomic Scientists 
of Chicago, 1126 East 59th Street, Chicago 
37. Phone: Midway 10052. Supported by 
a grant from the Emergency Committee of 
Atomic Scientists, Albert Einstein, Chairman; 
Harold C. Urey, Vice-Chairman. 


The opinions expressed in the BULLETIN do 
not represent the official views of any or- 
ganization. Subscription price—$2.50 a year. 
Single copy—25 cents. REPORT change of 
address direct to the BULLETIN, allowing 
4 weeks before change is to take effect. 
Manuscripts should be sent in triplicate 
to H. H. Goldsmith at the above address. 


PHYSICS IN THE 
CONTEMPORARY WORLD 


J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Dr. Oppenheimer's authority to speak on the relation of physics to 
the contemporary scene derives from his years of experience as a 
teacher of physics, his leadership in the Manhattan Project and 
his current position as Director of the Institute for Advanced Study 
at Princeton. The following remarks formed the 1947 Arthur D. 
Little Memorial Lecture and are reprinted from THE TECHNOL- 
OGY REVIEW, February, 1948, edited at the Massachusetts In- 
stitute of Technology. 


In the ways of science, its practice, the peculiarities of its discipline and 
universality, there are pajterns which in the past have somewhat altered, 
and in the future may greatly alter, all that we think about the world and 
how we manage to live in it. What I shall be able to say of this will not 
be rich in exhortation; for this is ground that I know how to tread only 
very slightly. 

But that I should be speaking of such general and such difficult ques- 
tions at all reflects in the first instance a good deal of self-consciousness on 
the part of physicists. This self-consciousness is in part a result of the 
highly critical traditions which have grown up in physics in the last half 
century, where we have been forced to become aware of what it is that we 
are doing. It reflects also the experiences of this century, which have shown 
in so poignant a way how much the applications of science determine our 
welfare and that of our fellows, and which have cast in doubt that traditional 
optimism, that confidence in progress, which have characterized Western 
Culture since the Renaissance. 

As it did on everything else, the last war had a great and at least a tem- 
porarily disastrous effect on the prosecution of pure science. The demands 
of military technology in this country and in Britain, the equally over-riding 
demands of the Resistance in much of Europe, distracted the physicists 
from their normal occupations as they distracted most other men. 

We in this country, who take our wars rather spastically, perhaps wit- 
nessed a more total cessation of true professional activity in the field of 
physics, even in its training, than any other people. For in all the doings of 
war we, as a country, have been a little like the young physicist who went 
to Washington to work for the NDRC in 1940. There he met his first Civil 
Service questionnaire, and came to the questions on drinking—never, occa- 
sionally, habitually, to excess. He checked both “occasionally” and “to 
excess.” So, in the past we have taken war. 

All over the world, whether because of the closing of universities, or the 
distractions of scientists called in one way or another to serve their coun- 
tries, or because of devastation and terror and attrition, there was a great 
gap in physical science. It has been an exciting and an inspiring sight to 
watch the recovery: a recovery testifying to extraordinary vitality and vigor 
in this human activity. Today, barely two years after the end of hostilities, 
physics is booming. 

One may have gained the impression that this boom derives primarily from 
the application of the new techniques developed during the war, such as the 
atomic reactor and micro-wave equipment; one may have gained the im- 
pression that in large part the flourishing of physics lies in exploitation 
of the eagerness of governments to promote it. These are indeed impor- 
tant factors. But they are only a small part of the story. Without in any 
way deprecating the great value of wartime technology, one nevertheless 
sees how much of what is today new knowledge can trace its origin direct- 
ly, by an orderly yet imaginative extension, to the kind of things that 
physicists were doing in their laboratories and with their pencils almost a 
decade ago. 


65 


Let me try to give a little more sub- 
stance to the physics that is booming. 
We are continuing the attempt to dis- 
cover, to identify and characterize, 
and surely ultimately to order, our 
knowledge of what the elementary 
particles of physics really are. I need 
hardly say that in the course of this 
we are learning again how far our 
notion of elementarity, of what makes 
a particle elementary, is from the 
early atomic ideas of the Hindu and 
Greek atomists, or even from the 
chemical atomists of a century ago. 
We are finding out that what we are 
forced to call elementary particles re- 
tain neither permanence nor identity, 
and they are elementary only in the 
sense that their properties cannot be 
understood by breaking them down 
into sub-components. Almost every 
month has surprises for us in the 
findings about these particles. We are 
meeting new ones for which we are 
not prepared. We are learning how 
poorly we had identified the properties 
even of our old friends among them. 
We are seeing what a challenging job 
the ordering of this experience is 
likely to be, and what a strange world 
we must enter to find that order. 


Tools for Understanding 
Elementary Particles 


In penetrating into this world per- 
haps our sharpest tool in the past 
has been the observation of the phe- 
nomena of the cosmic rays in inter- 
action with matter. But the next years 
will see an important methodological 
improvement, when the great program 
of ultra high energy accelerators be- 
gins to get under way. This program 
is itself one of the expensive parts of 
physics. It has been greatly subsi- 
dized by the Government, primarily 
through the Atomic Energy Commis- 
sion and the Office of Naval Research. 
It is a superlative example, of which 
one could find so many, of the repay- 
ment that technology makes to basic 
science, in providing means whereby 
our physical experience can be ex- 
tended and enriched. 

Another progress is the refinement 
of our knowledge of the behavior of 
electrons within atomic systems, a re- 
finement which on the one hand is 
based on the micro-wave techniques, 
to the developments of which the Ra- 
diation Laboratory of the Massa- 
chusetis Institute of Technology made 
unique contributions, and which on the 
other hand has provided a newly vig- 
orous criterion for the adequacy of 
our knowledge of the interactions of 


66 


radiation and matter. Thus we are 
beginning to see in this field at least 
a partial resolution, and I am myself 
inclined to think rather more than 
that, of the paradoxes that have 
plagued the professional physical 
theorists for two decades. 

A third advance in atomic physics 
is in the increasing understanding of 
those forces which give to atomic 
nuclei their great stability, and to 
their transmutations their great vio- 
lence. It is the prevailing view that 
a true understanding of these forces 
may well not be separable from the 
ordering of our experience with re- 
gard to elementary particles, and 
that it may also turn on an extension 
to new fields of recent advances in 
electro-dynamics. 

However this may be, all of us who 
are physicists by profession know that 
we are embarked on another great 
adventure of exploration and under- 
standing, and count ourselves happy 
for that. 


The International Picture 


In how far is this an account of 
physics in the United States only? In 
how far does it apply to other parts of 
the world, more seriously ravaged and 
more deeply disturbed by the last war? 
That question may have a somewhat 
complex answer, to the varied ele- 
ments of which one may pay respect- 
ful attention. 

In much of Europe and in Japan, 
that part of physics which does not 
rest on the availability of elaborate 
and radical new equipment is enjoy- 
ing a recovery comparable to our own. 
The traditional close associations of 
workers in various countries makes 
it just as difficult now to disentangle 
the contributions by nationality as it 
was in the past. But there can be lit- 
tle doubt that it is very much harder 
for a physicist in France, for instance, 
or the Low Countries, and very much 
more nearly impossible for him in 
Japan, to build a giant accelerator, 
than for the workers in this country. 

Yet in those areas of the world 
where science has not merely been dis- 
turbed or arrested by war and by ter- 
ror, but where terror and its official 
philosophy have, in a deep sense, cor- 
rupted its very foundations, even the 
traditional fraternity of scientists has 
not proved adequate protection against 
decay. It may not be clear to us in 
what way and to what extent the spirit 
of scientific inquiry may come to apply 
to matters not yet, and perhaps never 
to be, part of the domain of science; 
but that it does apply there is one very 


brutal indication. Tyranny, when it 
gets to be absolute, or when it tends 
so to become, finds it impossible to 
continue to live with science. 


Even in the good ways of contem- 
porary physics, we are reluctantly 
made aware of our dependence on 
things which lie outside our science. 
The experience of the war, for those 
who were called upon to serve the sur- 
vival of their civilization through the 
Resistance, and for those who contrib- 
uted more remotely, if far more de- 
cisively, by the development of new 
instruments and weapons of war, has 
left us with a legacy of concern. In 
these troubled times it is not likely 
that we shall be free of it altogether. 
Nor perhaps is it right that we should 
be. 


Nowhere is this troubled sense of 
responsibility more acute, and surely 
nowhere has it been more prolix, than 
among those who participated in the 
development of atomic energy for mil- 
itary purposes. I should think that 
most historians would agree that oth- 
er technical developments, notably ra- 
dar, played a more decisive part in 
determining the outcome of this last 
war. But I doubt whether that par- 
ticipation would, of itself, have created 
the deep trouble and moral concern 
which so many of us who were physi- 
cists have felt, have voiced, and have 
tried to get over feeling. It is not 
hard to understand why this should be 
so. The physics which played the de- 
cisive part in the development of the 
atomic bomb came straight out of our 
laboratories and our journals. 

Despite the vision and the farseeing 
wisdom of our wartime heads of state, 
the physicists felt a peculiarly inti- 
mate responsibility for suggesting, for 
supporting, and in the end, in large 
measure, for achieving, the realiza- 
tion of atomic weapons. Nor can we 
forget that these weapons, as they 
were in fact used, dramatized so mer- 
cilessly the inhumanity and evil of 
modern war. In some sort of crude 
sense which no vulgarity, no humor, 
no over-statement can quite extin- 
guish, the physicists have known sin; 
and this is a knowledge which they 
cannot lose. 


The Interaction of 
Science and Technology 


Probably in giving expression to 
such feelings of concern most of us 
have belabored the influence of science 
on society through the medium of tech- 
nology. This is natural, since the de- 
velopments of the war years were al- 


most exclusively technological, and 
since the participation of academic 
scientists forced them to be deeply 
aware of an activity of whose exist- 
ence they had always known but which 
had been often remote from them. 


When I was a student at Géttingen 
twenty years ago, there was a story 
current about the great mathematician 
Hilbert, who perhaps would have 
liked, had the world let him, to have 
thought of his science as something 
independent of worldly vicissitudes. 
Hilbert had a colleague, an equally 
eminent mathematician, Felix Klein, 
who was certainly aware, if not of the 
dependence of science generally on 
society, at least of mathematics on the 
physical sciences which nourish it and 
give it application. Klein used to take 
some of his students to meet once a 
year with the engineers of the Tech- 
nical High School in Hanover. One 
year he was ill, and asked Hilbert to 
go in his stead, and urged him, in the 
little talk that he would give, to try 
to refute the then prevalent notion 
that there was a basic hostility be- 
tween science and technology. Hilbert 
promised to do so; but when the time 
came a magnificent absentmindedness 
led him instead to speak his own 
mind: “One hears a good deal nowa- 
days of the hostility between science 
and technology. I don’t think that is 
true, gentlemen. I am quite sure that 
it isn’t true, gentlemen. It almost cer- 
tainly isn’t true. It really can’t be 
true. Sie haben ja gar nichts mit 
einander zu tun. They have nothing 
whatever to do with one another.” 
Today the wars and the troubled times 
deny us the luxury of such absent- 
mindedness. 


The great testimony of history 
shows how often in fact the develop- 
ment of science has emerged in re- 
sponse to technological, and even eco- 
nomic needs, and how in the economy 
of social effort, science, even of the 
most abstract and recondite kind, pays 
for itself again and again in provid- 
ing the basis for radically new tech- 
nological developments. In fact, most 
people, when they think of science as 
a good thing, when they think of it as 
worthy of encouragement, when they 
are willing to see their governments 
spend substance upon it, when they 
greatly do honor to men who in science 
have attained some eminence, have in 
mind that the conditions of their life 
have been altered just by such tech- 
nology, of which they may be reluc- 
tant to be deprived. 


The debt of science to technology is 
just as great. Even the most abstract 


researches owe their very existence to 
things that have taken place quite 
outside of science, and with the pri- 
mary purpose of altering and improv- 
ing the conditions of man’s life. As 
long as there is a healthy physics, this 
mutual fructification will surely con- 
tinue. Out of its work there will come 
in the future; as so often in the past, 
and with an apparently chaotic un- 
predictability, things which will im- 
prove man’s health, ease his labor, and 
divert and edify him. There will come 
things which, properly handled, will 
shorten his working day and take 
away the most burdensome part of 
his effort, which will enable him to 
communicate, to travel, and to have 
a wider choice both in the general 
question of how he is to spend his life, 
and in the specific question of how he 
is to spend an hour of his leisure. 
There is no need to belabor this point, 
nor its obverse—that out of science 
there will come, as there has in this 
last war, a host of instruments of de- 
struction which will facilitate that 
labor, even as they have facilitated 
all others. 


The Scientist Is 
Responsible to Science 


But no scientist, no matter how 
aware he may be of these fruits of 
his science, cultivates his work, or 
refrains from it, because of arguments 
such as these. No scientist can hope 
to evaluate what his studies, his re- 
searches, his experiments, may in the 
end produce for his fellowmen, except 
in one respect—if they are sound, 
they will produce knowledge. And 
this deep complementarity between 
what may be conceived to be the social 
justification of science, and what is 
for the individual his compelling mo- 
tive in its pursuit, makes us look for 
other answers to the question of the 
relation of science to society. 

One of these is that the scientist 
should assume responsibility for the 
fruits of his work. I would not argue 
against this, but it must be clear to 
all of us how very modest such as- 
sumption of responsibility can be, how 
very ineffective it has been in the past, 
how necessarily ineffective it will 
surely be in the future. In fact, it ap- 
pears little more than an exhortation 
to the man of learning to be properly 
uncomfortable; and, in the worst in- 
stances, is used as a sort of screen to 
justify the most casual, unscholarly 
and, in the last analysis, corrupt in- 
trusion of scientists into other realms 
of which they have neither experience 


nor knowledge, nor the patience to 
obtain it. 

The true responsibility of a scien- 
tist, as we all know, is to the integrity 
and vigor of his science. And because 
most scientists, like all men of learn- 
ing, tend in part also to be teachers, 
they have a responsibility for the 
communication of the truths which 
they have found. This is at least a 
collective if not an individual responsi- 
bility. That we should see in this any 
insurance that the fruits of science 
will be used for man’s benefit, or de- 
nied to man when they make for his 
distress or destruction, would be a 
tragic naiveté. 


Can Scientists’ Ways 
Provide a Pattern? 


There is another side of the coin. 
This is the question of whether there 
are elements in the way of life of the 
scientist which need not be restricted 
to the professional, and which have 
hope in them for bringing dignity and 
courage and serenity to other men. 
Science is not all of the life of reason; 
it is a part of it. As such, what can 
it mean to man? 

Perhaps it would be well to empha- 
size that I am talking neither of wis- 
dom, nor of an élite of scientists, but 
precisely of the kind of work and 
thought, of action and discipline, that 
makes up the everyday professional 
life of the scientist. It is not of any 
general insight into human affairs 
that I am talking. It is not the kind 
of thing we recognize in our greatest 
statesmen, after long service devoted 
to practical affairs and to the public 
interest. It is something very much 
more homely and robust than that. It 
has in it the kind of beauty that is 
inseparable from craftsmanship and 
form, but that has in it also the vigor 
which we rightly associate with the 
simple ordered lives of artisans or of 
farmers, that we rightly associate 
with lives to which limitations of 
scope, and traditional ways, have giv- 
en robustness and structure. 

Even less would it be right to in- 
terpret the question of what there is 
in the ways of science which may be 
of general value to mankind in terms 
of the creation of an élite. The study 
of physics, and I think my colleagues 
in the other sciences will let me speak 
for them too, does not make philoso- 
pher-kings. It has not, until now, 
made kings. It almost never makes 
fit philosophers—so rarely that they 
must be counted as exceptions. If the 
professional pursuit of science makes 


67 


good scientists, if it makes men with 
a certain serenity in their lives, who 
yield perhaps a little more slowly 
than others to the natural corruptions 
of their time, it is doing a great deal, 
and all that we may rightly ask of it. 
For if Plato believed that in the study 
of geometry, a man might prepare 
himself for wisdom and responsibility 
in the world of men, it was precisely 
because he thought so hopefully that 
the understanding of men could be 
patterned after the understanding of 
geometry. If we believe that today, it 
js in a much more recondite sense, 
and a much more cautious one. 


What then is the point? For one 
thing it is to describe some of the 
features of the professional life of the 
scientist, which make it one of the 
great phenomena of the contemporary 
world, Here again, I would like to 
speak of physics; but I have enough 
friends in the other sciences to know 
how close their experience is to ours. 
And I know too that despite profound 
differences in method and technique, 
differences which surely are an appro- 
priate reflection of the difference in 
the areas of the world under study, 
what I would say of physics will seem 
familiar to workers in other disparate 
fields, such as mathematics, or biology. 


The Nature of the 
Scientific Discipline 


What are some of these points? 
There is, in the first instance, a total 
lack of authoritarianism, which is hard 
to comprehend or to admit unless one 
has lived with it. This is accomplished 
by one of the most exacting of intel- 
lectual disciplines. In physics the 
worker learns the possibility of error 
very early. He learns that there are 
ways to correct his mistakes; he 
learns the futility of trying to con- 
ceal them. For it is not a field in 
which error awaits death and subse- 
quent generations for verdict—the 
next issue of the journals will take 
eare of it. The refinement of tech- 
niques for the prompt discovery of 
error serves as well as any other as 
a hallmark of what we mean by 
science. 

In any case, it is an area of collec- 
tive effort, in which there is a clear 
and well defined community whose 
canons of taste and order simplify 
the life of the practitioner. It is a field 
in which the technique of experiment 
has given an almost perfect harmony 
to the balance between thought and 
action. In it we learn so frequently 


that we could almost become accus- 
tomed to it, how vast is the novelty of 
the world, and how much even the 
physical world transcends in delicacy 
and in balance the limits of man’s 
prior imaginings. We learn that views 
may be useful and inspiriting although 
they are not complete. We come to 
have a great caution in all assertions 
of totality, of finality or absoluteness. 


In this field quite ordinary men, us- 
ing what are in the last analysis only 
the tools which are generally available 
in our society, manage to unfold fot 
themselves and all others who wish 
to learn, the rich story of one aspect 
of the physical world, and of man’s 
experience. We learn to throw away 
those instruments of action and those 
modes of description which are not 
appropriate to the reality we are try- 
ing to discern, and in this most pain- 
ful discipline, find ourselves modest 
before the world. 


Can This Discipline Be 
Applied to Other Fields? 


The question which is so much in 
our mind is whether a comparable ex- 
perience, a comparable discipline, a 
comparable community of interest, 
can in any way be available to man- 
kind at large. I suppose that all the 
professional scientists together num- 
ber some one one-hundredth of a per 
cent of the men of the world—even 
this will define rather generously 
what we mean by scientists. Scientists 
as professionals are, I suppose, rath- 
er sure to constitute a small part of 
our people. 


Clearly, if we raise at all this ques- 
tion which I have raised, it must be 
in the hope that there are other areas 
of human experience that may be dis- 
covered or invented or cultivated, and 
to which the qualities which distin- 
guish scientific life may be congenial 
and appropriate. It is natural that 
serious scientists, knowing of their 
own experience something of the qual- 
ity of their profession, should just 
today be concerned about its possible 
extension. For it is a time when the 
destruction and the evil of the last 
quarter century make men everywhere 
eager to seek all that can contribute 
to their intellectual life, some of the 
order and freedom and purpose which 
we conceive the great days of the past 
to have had. Of all intellectual activity, 
science alone has flourished in the last 
centuries, science alone has turned 
out to have the kind of universality 
among men which the times require. 


I shall be disputed in this; but it is 
near to truth. 

If one looks at past history, one 
may derive some encouragement for 
the hope that science, as one of the 
forms of reason, will nourish all of its 
forms. One may note how integral the 
love and cultivation of science was 
with the whole awakening of the hu- 
man spirit which characterized the 
Renaissance. Or one may look at the 
late Seventeenth and Eighteenth Cen- 
turies in France and England, and 
see what pleasure and what stimula- 
tion the men of that time derived 
from the growth of physics, astronomy 
and mathematics. 

What perhaps characterizes these 
periods of the past, which we must 
be careful not to make more heroic 
because of their remoteness, was that 
there were many men who were able 
to combine in their own lives the activ- 
ities of a scientist with activities of 
art and learning and politics, and 
were able to carry over from the one 
into the others this combination of 
courage and modesty which is the 
lesson that science always tries to 
teach to anyone who practices it. 


Can the Spirit 
of Science Be Taught? 


And here we come to a point we 
touched earlier. It is very different to 
hear the results of science, as they 
may be descriptively or even analyti- 
cally taught in a class or in a book 
or in the popular talk of the time; it 
is very different to hear these and to 
participate even in a modest way in 
the actual attainment of new knowl- 
edge. For it is just characteristic of 
all work in scientific fields that there 
is no authority to whom to refer, no 
one to give canon, no one to blame if 
the picture does not make sense. 

Clearly these circumstances pose a 
question of great difficulty in the field 
of education. For if there is any truth 
in the views that I have outlined, 
there is all the difference in the world 
between hearing about science or its 
results, and sharing in the experience 
of the scientist himself and of that of 
the scientific community. We all know 
that an awareness of this, and an 
awareness of the value of science as 
method, rather than science as doc- 
trine, underlies the practices of teach- 
ing te scientist and layman alike. For 
surely the whole notion of incerporat- 
ing a laboratory in a high school or 
college is a deference to the belief 


(Continued on Page 85) 


January: -29. Working commit- 
tee heard Mr. Miles observe, on Soviet 
Point 8, that “the inspectorial appara- 
tus is about all the agency will have.” 
M. de Rose said the agency must 
have other functions. Detailed dis- 
cussion was left to later linked points. 

Point 4 came up, providing for a 
special control convention “to be con- 
cluded in accordance with the con- 
vention on the prohibition of atomic 
weapons.” With it was a British ques- 
tion asking if the Soviet would agree 
that the outlawry pact “shall only 
come into force following satisfac- 
tory implementation of the second 
convention.” The Soviet had answered 
that the control convention “must be 
concluded” after conclusion of the pro- 
hibition convention. 

M. de Rose observed the 1907 Hague 
convention had prohibited use of poi- 
son gas, but such gas was used in 
World War I and manufactured be- 
tween the two world wars by “all 
powers.” He said all points should 
be dealt with simultaneously by a 
convention. 

Mr. Miles recalled the 1925 Geneva 
protocol, signed by some thirty coun- 
tries, prohibited both gas and bac- 
teriological warfare. “Nevertheless, 
there is not a large state in the world 
that has not conducted active research 
into the use of these forms of war- 
fare, and the world well knows that 
‘it cannot depend on this convention.” 
Prohibition without prevention is use- 
less, he said. 

Dr. John D. Babbitt, of Canada, a 
National Research Council physicist, 
felt there was room for clarifying the 
relation between the two Soviet con- 
ventions. He asked for a “yes or no” 
answer to the British suggestion that 
the prohibition convention should 
come into force following implemen- 
tation of the control pact. 


Mr. Gromyko 
Refuses Overtures 


Mr. Gromyko slammed the door: 
“We consider that the convention on 
the prohibition of atomic weapons 
must be not only signed but also put 
into force before the other convention 
is concluded.” Otherwise, he said, the 
outlawry pact “would not make sense” 
and would be “a piece of paper.” 

Chairman Farris el Khouri, of Sy- 
ria, asked if this meant destruction 
of existing bombs before the control 
pact, too. Mr. Gromyko said it did— 
within the period specified by the 


Soviet’s June 19, 1946 draft con- 
vention proposal, namely, within nine- 
ty days after ratification. 


Dr. Wei asked if, in case the first 
convention were carried out and then 
majority and minority proposals on 
controls developed: “Will the minority 
go along with the majority?” He 
asked if there were any assurance 
of a second convention. He feared 
lest the first step become “the last 
step,” and the prohibition pact “meet 
the same fate—failure—as many pre- 
vious conventions.” 


Mr. Gromyko said it had not been 
the Soviet fault that the commission 
had not yet found a basis for agree- 
ment. The Soviet had pointed out 
decreases in divergences on “certain 
minor points,” and “then some mem- 
bers of the Atomic Energy Commis- 
sion did everything possible to widen 
this divergence of views on certain 
points, and we could not help com- 
ing to the conclusion that probably 
not all of us are in agreement at the 
present time at least on carrying 
out in practice the decision of the 
United Nations on the establishment 
of effective international control of 
atomic energy.” 


The Soviet delegate added: “Such 
proposals as were submitted by the 
United States representative—I have 
in mind the so-called Baruch plan, 
which, as far as I know, was not 
substantially changed later by the 
United States—are absolutely un- 
realistic. 


“They do not follow from the in- 
terests and demands of the establish- 
ment of effective international con- 
trol. They are subordinated to the in- 
terests mainly of one country .. . 
We have to carry out our negotiations 
on the basis of realistic and practical 
proposals, and put aside those pro- 
posals which prove to be unrealistic 
and which cannot constitute a basis 
for agreement.” 


Chairman Khouri said the commis- 
sion should not waste further time in 
“academic discussion,” but should pre- 
pare both prohibition and control con- 
ventions simultaneously, as quickly as 
possible. “If they were then presented 
together,” he said, “there would, I 
feel, no longer be any pretext for 
opposition or contention.” He ex- 
pressed the belief the Soviet would 
not object to the control convention 
if it were presented and put into 
force at the same time as the pro- 
hibition convention. 


Physics in the 
Contemporary World 


(Continued from Page 68) 


that not only what the scientist finds 
but how he finds it is worth learning 
and teaching and worth living 
through. 


Yet there is something fake about 
all this. No one who has had to do 
with elementary instruction can have 
escaped a sense of artificiality in the 
way in which students are led, by the 
calculations of their instructors, to 
follow paths which will tell them 
something about the physical world. 
Precisely that groping for what is the 
appropriate experiment, what are the 
appropriate terms in which to view 
subtle or complex phenomena, which 
are the substance of scientific effort, 
almost inevitably are distilled out of 
it by the natural patterns of peda- 
gogy. The teaching of science to lay- 
men is not wholly a loss; and here 
perhaps physics is a typically bad ex- 
ample. But surely they are rare men 
who, entering upon a life in whieh 
science plays no direct part, rem@h- 
ber from their early courses in physics 
what science is like or what it is good 
for. The teaching of science is at its 
best when it is most like an appren- 
ticeship. 


President Conant, in his sensitive 
and thoughtful book, On Understand- 
ing Science, has spoken at length of 
these matters. He is aware of how 
false it is to separate scientific theory 
from the groping, fumbling, tentative 
efforts which lead to it. He is aware 
that it is science as method and not 
as doctrine which we should try to 
teach. His basic suggestion is that we 
attempt to find, in the history of our 
sciences, stories which can be re- 
created in the instruction and experi- 
ment of the student, and which thus 
can enable him to see at first hand 
how error may give way to less error, 
confusion to less confusion, and be- 
wilderment to insight. 


The problem that President Conant 
has here presented is indeed a deep 
one. Yet he would be quite willing, I 
think, that I express skepticism that 
one can recreate the experience of 
science as an artifact. And he would 
no doubt share my concern that sci- 
ence so taught would be corrupt with 
antiquarianism. It was not antiquar- 
ianism, but a driving curiosity, that 
inspired in the men of the Renais- 


sance their deep interest in classical 
culture. 

For it is in fact difficult, almost to 
the point of impossibility, to recreate 
the climate of opinion in which sub- 
stantial errors about the physical 
world, now no longer entertained, 
were not only held but were held un- 
questioned as part of the obvious 
mode of thinking about reality. It is 
most difficult to do because in all hu- 
man thought only the tiniest fraction 
of our experience is in focus, and be- 
cause to this focus a whole vast un- 
analyzed account of experience must 
be brought to bear. Thus I am in- 
clined to think that with exceptions 
that I hope will be many, but fear 
will be few, the attempt to give the 
history of science as a living history 
will be far more difficult than either 
to tell of the knowledge that we hold 
today, or to write externally of that 
history as it may appear in the 
learned books. It could easily lead to 
a sort of exercise of mental inventive- 
ness on the part of teachers and stu- 
dents alike which is the very opposite 
of the candor, the “no-holds-barred” 
rules of Professor Bridgman, that 
characterize scientific understanding 
atdts best. 


If I am troubled by President Co- 
nant’s suggestions, this is not at all 
because I doubt that the suggestions 
he makes are desirable. I do have a 
deep doubt as to the extent to which 
they may be practical. There is some- 
thing irreversible about acquiring 
knowledge; and the simulation of the 
search for it differs in a most pro- 
‘found way from the reality. In fact, 
it would seem that only those who had 
some first-hand experience in the ac- 
quisition of new knowledge in some 
disciplined field would be able truly 
to appreciate how great the science of 
the past has been, and would be able 
to measure those giant accomplish- 
ments against their own efforts to 
penetrate a few millimeters further 
into the darkness that surrounds 
them. 


Thus it would seem at least doubt- 
ful that the spiritual fruits of science 
could be made generally available, 
either by the communication of its 
results, or by the study of its history, 
or by the necessarily somewhat arti- 
ficial reenactment of its procedures. 
Rather it would seem that there are 
general features of the scientists’ 
work, the direct experience of which in 
any context could contribute more to 
this end. All of us, I suppose, would 
list such features and find it hard to 
define the words which we found it 


86 


necessary to use in our lists. But on 
a few, a common experience may en- 
able us to talk in concert. 

In the first instance the work of sci- 
ence is cooperative; a scientist takes 
his colleagues as judges, competitors 
and collaborators. The work of science 
is disciplined, in that its essential in- 
ventiveness is most of all dedicated to 
means for promptly revealing error. 
One may think of the rigors of mathe- 
matics, and the virtuosity of physical 
experiment as two examples. Science 
is ‘disciplined in its rejection of ques- 
tions that cannot be answered, and in 
its grinding pursuit of methods for 
answering all that can. Science is al- 
ways limited, and is in a profound 
sense unmetaphysical, in that it nec- 
essarily bases itself upon the broad 
ground of common human experience, 
tries to refine it within narrow areas 
where progress seems possible and ex- 
ploration fruitful. Science is novelty, 
and change. When it closes it dies... 
These qualities constitute a way of 
life which of course does not make 
wise men from foolish, or good men 
from wicked, but which has its beauty 
and which seems singularly suited to 
man’s estate on earth. 

If there is to be any advocacy at all 
in this talk it would be this—that we 
be very sensitive to all new possibil- 
ities of extending the techniques and 
the patterns of science into other areas 
of human experience. 


The Scientific Approach 
and Social Problems 


We become fully aware of the need 
for caution if we look for a moment 
at what are called the social problems 
of the day, and try to think what one 
could mean by approaching them in 
the scientific spirit, of trying to give 
substance, for example, to the feeling 
that a society that could develop 
atomic energy could also develop the 
means of controlling it. Surely the 
establishment of a secure peace is 
very much in all our minds. It is 
right that we try to bring reason to 
bear on an understanding of this prob- 
lem; but for that there are available 
to us no equivalents of the experi- 
mental techniques of science. Errors 
of conception can remain undetected 
and even undefined. No means of ap- 
propriately narrowing the focus of 
thinking is known to us. Nor have we 
found good avenues for extending or 
deepening our experience that bears 
upon this problem. In short, almost 
all the preconditions of scientific ac- 


tivity are missing, and in this case, 
at least, one may have a melancholy 
certainty that man’s inventiveness will 
not rapidly provide them. All that 
we have from science in facing such 
great questions is a memory of our 
professional life, which makes us 
somewhat sceptical of other people’s 
assertions, somewhat critical of en- 
thusiasms so difficult to define and to 
control. 


Yet the past century has seen many 
valid and inspiring examples for the 
extension of science to new domains, 
One feature which I cannot fail to re- 
gard as sound—particularly in the 
fields of biology and psychology—is 
that they provide an appropriate 
means of correlating understanding 
and action, and involve new experi- 
mental procedures in terms of which 
a new conceptual apparatus can be 
defined; above all, they give us means 
of detecting error. In fact, one of the 
features which must arouse our sus- 
picion of the dogmas some of Freud’s 
followers have built up on the initial 
brilliant works of Freud, is the ten- 
dency towards a self-sealing system, a 
system, that is, which has a way of 
almost automatically discounting evi- 
dence which might bear adversely on 
the doctrine. The whole point of sci- 
ence is to do just the opposite: to in- 
vite the detection of error and to wel- 
come it: Some of you may think that 
in another field a comparable system 
has been developed by the recent fol- 
lowers of Marx. 


Thus we may hope for an ever wid- 
ening and more diverse field of appli- 
cation of science. But we must be 
aware how slowly these things develop, 
and how little their development is 
responsive to even the most desperate 
of man’s needs. For me it is an open 
question, and yet not a trivial one, 
whether in a time necessarily limited 
by the threats of war and of chaos, 
these expanding areas in which the 
scientific spirit can flourish may yet 
contribute in a decisive way to man’s 
rational life. 

I have had to leave this essential 
question unanswered: I am not at all 
proud of that. In lieu of apology per- 
haps I may tell a story of another lec- 
turer, speaking at Harvard two dec- 
ades ago. Bertrand Russell had given 
a talk on the then new quantum me- 
chanics, of whose wonders he was 
most appreciative. He spoke hard and 
earnestly. And when he was done, 
Professor Whitehead, who presided, 
thanked him for his efforts, and not 
least for “leaving the vast darkness 
of the subject unobscured.” 


