NovEMBER 27, 1926] 


NATURE 


771 


cannot now be employed in that sense. In English 
usage, ‘ candle-power ’ is strictly a form of power, and 
might, if we had the data, be defined in ergs per second. 
In French, an electric current cannot be strictly 
expressed in amperes, but the iutensité of a current 
can be so stated. In English, the notion of intensité 
is here redundant, and, as the reviewer observes, 
‘In scientific English the word ‘ intensity ’ always con- 
notes something analogous to ‘energy per unit area.’ ”’ 
A good deal might be said about the proper use of 
the term ‘ flux,’ when ‘ luminous flux’ is to be sub- 
stituted for ‘light.’ Flux is generally employed in 
English to connote a flow, not a rate. ‘ Luminous 
radiation ’ is all that is wanted, without introducing 
the conception of a rate. Need we stop to consider, 
or wait to know what light is before using the word 
in scientific English ? Heat is not easy to define, 
temperature is less easy, but no new terms are wanted 
here. A. P. TROTTER. 
Teffont, Salisbury, 
October 30. 


I am very glad to find Mr. Trotter in agreement 
with me regarding some points in photometric 
nomenclature, but in reply to his concluding remarks 
I have only to suggest that the scientific use of the 
term ‘light’ should be at least as exact and simple as 
its ordinary use in English. Terms like ‘ ultra-violet 
light ’ are simply ridiculous. That is why I suggested 
a greater care in the use of the word. Why manu- 
facture new terms because a very small proportion 
of the population misuses the good old words ? 

L. Cc. M. 


Broadcasting Birth-control. 


Sir James Marcuant, in a letter published in the 
Times of November 17, refers to my “ extreme and 
one-sided views’’ on the subject of birth-control. 
As there appears to be much misconception in regard 
to what I actually did say on this subject during the 
broadcast debate on “‘ Is Science Bad for the World ?” 
on November 16, I should like to have the opportunity 
of putting my words on record. They were as 
follows : 

“ Birth-control is capable of great harm, if it is 
not regulated ; but its absence would lead to greater 
harm. It therefore must be regulated and supervised 
by the State” (or, I would now add, by the medical 
profession), “ and the nation should allow no inter- 
ference on the part of prudery or of religious in- 
tolerance. |...” Here I was interrupted. 

J claim that this statement was neither extreme nor 
one-sided. Whether . subjects like ‘ birth-control ” 
should ever be mentioned on the wireless is another 
issue altogether. To me personally, letters such as 
that of Sir James Marchant appear to add point to 
the fear which has been expressed that State control 
of broadcasting might well tend to dulness and 
sterility through a banning of all controversial 
matters. Had broadcasting been possible in 1859, 
doubtless no expression of opinion would have been 
allowed over the wireless on the shocking question 
of whether man had not been specially created, but 
had evolved from animals. 

However, I am here only concerned to defend 
myself from the imputation of having abused my 
privileged position at the microphone. I should also 
add that a year ago I was invited to give a series of 
wireless talks on biology and human life, and that 
no objection was then raised by the B.B.C. to the 
brief references to birth-control which I there made. 
I therefore conclude (and earnestly hope that I am 
correct) that though the policy of the B.B.C. may be 


NO. 2978, VOL. 118] 


against the raising of the question in a controversial 
way in debate, this does not preclude the topic from 
ever being mentioned over the wireless. 
Jutian S. Huxrey. 
King’s College, 
Strand, London, W.C.z2. 


Spectrographic Junction between the X-ray Region 
and the Extreme Ultra-violet. 


In a letter published in Nature of October 16, p. 
551, Dr. A. Dauvillier has announced some pre- 
liminary results of attempts to get spectroscopic 
evidence of the unknown region ‘between the X-rays 
and the extreme ultra-violet. He has followed the 
same general methods and technique as have been 
used by me in measuring the K- and L-series of the 
formerly unknown domain of wave-lengths 12 AU 
25 A.U. (Phil. Mag., February 1926). 

My experience from this work is that a thorough 
critical scrutiny of the obtained spectrograms is 
necessary to exclude erroneous interpretations. To 
show that the lines found were not ordinary short 
wave-lengths reflected in higher orders or in other 
atomic planes than those supposed, Dr. Dauvillier has 
used goldbeater’s foil. Our experience is that such 
foils, even of the thinnest obtainable sort, absorb com- 
pletely all wave-lengths greater than 13 A.U.-15 A.U., 
and therefore it is scarcely possible by this means to 
identify the longer wave-lengths. 

It is also surprising that a foil of magnesium thick 
enough to prevent the photographic plate from 
fogging by the rather intense ordinary light would 
transmit this very soft radiation in any considerable 
amount, especially when the relatively small in- 
tensity of the N- and O-series, as also theoretically 
suggested by Kramers, is taken into account. 

It will, however, be of great interest to get a de- 
tailed report of these experiments, which, if they 
prove to be correctly interpreted, are of high scientific 
value. RoBeERT THORZUS. 

Physical Laboratory of the University, 

Upsala, Sweden, October 29. 


Quantum Theory and Intensity Distribution in 
Continuous Spectra. 


Tue undulatory mechanics makes it possible to give 
a quantum theory of aperiodic phenomena, and, in 
particular, to compute the intensity distribution for 
continuous spectra. The theory has recently been 
applied to the hyperbolic orbits of the hydrogen atom 
(Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc., Oct. 1926). The results are 
too complicated to be given here in detail; but they 
yield an estimate of the intensity distribution in the 
continuous X-ray absorption spectra. This is, I 
believe, the first experimental verification of this 
part of the theory. . ae 

According to the theory, absorption sets in discon- 
tinuously at the series limit with a finite value, which, 
for a given », electron, is proportional to the wave- 
length of the limit. For very short waves the ab- 
sorption coefficient is of the form f(n, k)Z*\*+e, 
where Z is the effective nuclear charge and \ the wave- 
length of the radiation, and where k=4,4.... The 
values of f(n, k) give atomic absorption coefficients 
ZB, where a ranges from 3 to 4-5, and where 8, for 
the shortest waves, is 2-5, and for the customary 
range varies between 2-5 and 3. This is in agreement 
with the empirical formule. 

J. R. OPPENHEIMER. 
Institut fiir Theoretische Physik, 
Gottingen, October 30. 


© 1926 Nature Publishing Group 


