Bulletin of the =} Routledge 
Atomic Scientists g 


Taylor & Francis Group 


Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 


pet Saran ond oct ty ISSN: 0096-3402 (Print) 1938-3282 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rbul20 


Science and Our Times 


J. Robert Oppenheimer 


To cite this article: J. Robert Oppenheimer (1956) Science and Our Times, Bulletin of the Atomic 
Scientists, 12:7, 235-237, DOI: 10.1080/00963402.1956. 11453735 


To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/00963402.1956.11453735 


sea Published online: 15 Sep 2015. 
NJ 

(g Submit your article to this journal @ 
N 

ey View related articles 


we Citing articles: 1 View citing articles @ 


Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at 
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=rbul20 


Science and Our Times 


J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER 


UR times have been deeply marked by science. 
What we think of it will shape the future. It is 
a great testament to man’s power and his rea- 

son; it is equally a testament to their limits. 

No one can have had the experience of new discovery, 
can have witnessed the transmutation of mystery to un- 
derstanding and order and then to greater mystery, with- 
out learning both of our helplessness and our great 
strength. Science sustains a view of man, piteously and 
even comically impotent, yet with a dignity and hope 
quite special to him. This is the view of man of the days 
of the Enlightenment, and of the founding of this Re- 
public. It seems quite in harmony with the teachings 
and spirit of the Stoics, with the blend of stoic tradition 
and Christian sensibility that characterized the emer- 
gence of the modern world. A sunny, hopeful view of 
science prevailed even in the early years of this century, 
during our childhood, though a few anxious observers 
had found the seeds of misgiving. Think, for instance, 
of Henry Adams, and his related concern for the rise of 
the specialist, and of the machine. 

Among the founders of the United States it is natu- 
tal .for us to remember Franklin and Jefferson: they 
were both in some real sense men of science as well as 
statesmen. They looked to science as an essential part 
of this country’s heritage. They saw first that in prac- 
tical terms it was a strong tool against misery and poy- 
erty and squalor. They rightly understood that science 
would contribute to the well-being and the civility of 
life in America. They saw it in intellectual terms as a 
guard against ignorance and superstition. They saw it 
in political terms as a guard against tyranny, barbarism, 
repression, and bigotry that they associated with centu- 
ties past, with the religious wars, the inquisition, and 
what they thought of as the dark ages. For them it was 
incompatible only with an authoritarianism, by which, 
they were determined, this country should never be 
darkened. 

The nearly two centuries that have elapsed since then 
have more than fulfilled the promise they saw. In the 
last years, we have moved, through discoveries in chem- 
istry, biochemistry, and genetics, by great steps nearer 


to an understanding of the origin of life, and its char- 
acteristic stability, variety, mutability, and form. We 
understand how, under the conditions prevailing on 
earth very long ago, organic materials characteristic of 
life would almost necessarily be formed from inorganic 
matter. In the coding, information bearing, and informa- 
tion transmitting characteristics of some nucleic acids, 
we have a beginning of an understanding of how living 
matter instructs its progeny to be a mold, an elephant, 
a tulip, or a man. We understand stars and galaxies to- 
day better than we understood the minerals of this 
earth a century ago. We even understand much of the 
evolution and history of stars, as they brighten and dark- 
en, fade, explode, and form again from dust. We are in 
the midst of finding an answer to the ancient questions 
of the constitution of matter. In this field we are today 
so beset by novelty, paradox, and puzzlement that we 
cannot escape the sense of a vast, strange new order 
waiting to be discovered. For the first time, we are be- 
ginning to learn some of the subtleties of perception and 
of memory. We know that the very maintenance of the 
rational faculties—the ability, for instance, to add and to 
subtract—and of memory itself, requires the constant 
flow of unnoticed sensory stimuli. 

The practical consequences of the application of sci- 
ence are everywhere about us; they have contributed to 
the largely new world in which we live. Some of these 
consequences are profoundly troublesome; of part of 
that I shall speak. Many appear today as mixed blessings: 
the automobile, the television tube, the antibiotics, call 
perhaps for somewhat greater wisdom than we have 
shown. But characteristically and overwhelmingly the 
applications of science have alleviated man’s sufferings, 
moderated his harshest limitations, and responded to his 
long-sustained aspirations. We live longer, labor less 
brutally, more seldom suffer starvation, find frequent 
comfort and relief in illness, travel, communicate, and 
learn with undreamed-of ease; and we need no slave or 
peon. 

It is a mark of our time that these changes must spread 
throughout the world; the world cannot endure half- 
darkness and half-light. This is of course not all that we 


235 


see stirring the peoples of Asia and Africa today; but 
surely it is a great and central part, and a most enduring 
part, of the need and the reality of change. What we 
have learned will not easily be lost; knowledge once given 
will not easily be lost in world-wide darkness as long as 
man endures; the powers that it gives offer too much to 
mankind for the sciences to desist or regress. It is true 
that there once were what we call the dark ages. They 
touched only one of the world’s civilizations; the knowl- 
edge they ignored for the most part survived elsewhere; 
and the sciences that languished had, in Greek and 
Hellenistic times, only the frailest of beginnings, had 
not begun to attain the instruments, the power, the 
success, the application, nor the explosively cumulative 
character that mark them today. In this one limited 
sense, man’s course cannot now be retrograde; in this 
one sense progress is inevitable. 


x *& ® 


It is my purpose here to identify two among many of 
the ways in which the great growth of science has cre- 
ated new problems for us. Both problems seem grave to 
me. They do not appear to me to be very directly re- 
lated, except that it is we, in our time, who must learn 
to live with them. One has to do with the powers that 
knowledge makes possible, and one with the effect of 
this explosive growth of knowledge on the nature of our 
culture. What is troublesome in the new situation mav 
not be easy to alter. We must start by trying to under- 
stand it. 

It is not new that knowledge brings power, and that 
among the powers may be the power to do evil. In mod- 
em science there is much such knowledge. It cannot be 
lost; it leads to powers the exercise of which spell dis- 
aster. The most familiar, though not the deepest exam- 
ple is the discovery of nuclear weapons, and the asso- 
ciated machinery of war. These have brought to a large 
part of mankind an appalling prospect of devastation 
and death, an apocalyptic vision of what would be a 
terrible reality. Much has been said of the prospect that 
man, along with many other forms of life, might lose 
his genetic inheritance, would disappear as a species. In 
time, not a long time, that may come to be possible. 
What is more certain and more immediate is that we 
would lose much of our human inheritance, much that 
has made our civilization and our humanity, very much 
of our life. 

In the great strides in the biological sciences, and far 
more still in the early beginnings of an understanding of 
man’s psyche, of his beliefs, his leaming, his memory, 
and his probable action, one can see the origin of still 
graver problems of good and evil. Today we know very 
little of these matters. We have little patches of illumi- 
nation and understanding, unrelated to any assured cor- 
pus of reasonably certain knowledge. If today we have 


236 


technical means for better predicting man’s behavior, 
the improvement is at best marginal. How shall we meet 
with wisdom the greater and more certain knowledge of 
how to make people think and do? Foreshadowing of 
this time we see both in brainwashing, and in propagan- 
da, that unhallowed marriage of crude psychological lore 
with the advanced technology of communication. 

The problem of these great powers is not made easier 
by the autonomy of the three-score governments that 
make up the world, nor by the little understood and in- 
tricate dispersal of power that characterizes some of the 
best of them, nor by the absence of any common code 
of conduct or common view of man between them. The 
problem is not made easier by the Communist powers, 
by their denial of any essential community with other 
societies, their long tradition of hostility, and their ex- 
treme, morbid preoccupation with power. It is not made 
easier by the experience of vast continents, whose history 
of European rule has induced a passion for national en- 
hancement, and a low and bitter appraisal of the West- 
ern heritage. In any real or immediate sense, it does not 
appear to be a soluble problem. The threat of the apo- 
calypse will be with us for a long time; the apocalypse 
may come. 

We can see perhaps only the dimmest outline of a 
course that, in the long term, may be hopeful: the crea- 
tion of honest and viable international communities, 
with increasing common knowledge and understanding. 
Of all such communities, those dealing with the sci- 
ences and their applications, those in which hope and 
danger are most intimately mixed, seem, if the most 
difficult to create, the most hopeful for our future. Such 
were indeed the hopes entertained at the War's end by 
many who had worked on the atomic project. They were 
in large part embodied in the Acheson-Lilienthal report, 
early in 1946, on how—in the words of that time—“co- 
operation might replace rivalry” in the development of 
atomic energy. Perhaps the world was not ripe nor ready. 
Perhaps we were not fully ready. Certainly the Soviet 
government was not ready. 

Shall we find other opportunities? We may. Looking 
at the broad ranges of science, with all its portents of 
benefit and misery, I should think that the answer was 
“yes.” 

The second element of novelty that science has 
brought to us, like the first, is a change in scale; it is 
not something wholly new; and like the first, it is an 
inherent, necessary accompaniment of the great success 
of the sciences. It is not new that what has been learned 
in the recent past is more than was learned in all of 
man’s earlier history. Men said that in the eighteenth 
century, and they were right. It continues to be true. 

Positive knowledge, what is recorded in the technical 
books and learned journals, all of it that is new and true 
and not trivial, is of course not wisdom; it can on occa- 


sion almost appear incompatible with wisdom. I think 
that such positive knowledge doubles in less than a gen- 
eration, perhaps in a decade. This means that most of 
what there is to know about the world of nature was 
not discovered when a man went to school; it means 
that universal knowledge, always, even in Leonardo’s 
day, a dream, but not an irrelevant dream, has become 
a mockery; it means that the specialized sciences, gene- 
tics, for instance, or astrophysics, or mathematics, are 
like the fingers of a hand: they all arise from the com- 
mon matrix of common sense, from man’s daily experi- 
ence, his history, his tradition, and his words. Each is 
now developing a life, an experience, and a language of 
its own, and between the tips of the fingers there is rare 
contact. For many centuries mathematics and physics 
grew in each other’s company, in happy symbiosis. To- 
day at their growing tips they hardly touch. Logic, psy- 
chology, philosophy were long studied in the same 
rooms, and often by the same man. Today they rarely 
speak to each other, and are more rarely understood or 
even heard. The deep, detailed, intimate almost loving 
knowledge of a specialized science is lost in synoptic 
views of science as a whole. These changes mean that 
ignorance is a universal, pervasive feature of our time. 
It is clear that they have an essential relevance to the 
problems of education. 

In a free world, if it is to remain free, we must main- 
tain, with our lives if need be, but surely by our lives, 
the opportunity for a man to learn anything. We need 
to do more: we need to cherish man’s curiosity, his un- 
derstanding, his love, so that he may indeed leam, learn 
what is new and hard and deep. We need to do this in 
a world in which the changes wrought by the applica- 
tions of science, and the din of communication from re- 
mote and different places, complement the unhinging, 


unmooring effects of the explosive growth in knowledge 
itself. For the un-understood rumors of change from the 
frontiers of physics, or from psychology, can be more 
deeply disturbing than what we hear of China or Kenya: 
they lead to despair of man’s reason. The rumored un- 
certainties of an endless quest for knowledge make, for 
the bewildered, as inhuman a view of man’s frailty as 
the rumored magic of science makes of his triumphs. 

Such a culture can hardly be architectonic in struc- 
ture. The world that we study is an orderly world, and 
this order illuminates and organizes our understanding; 
but it is not an heirarchical nor an architectonic order. 
It has no central chamber of man’s common under- 
standing, a common repository of all essential knowl- 
edge. It has instead the structure of a vast, manifold, 
many dimensional network of bonds. We deceive our- 
selves, if we attempt to model our culture on Athens in 
the fifth century, or the thirteenth century in Europe. 

The bonds of understanding reflect the order and de- 
fine the structure of our world. The man who bears in 
himself. more than one passion for knowledge creates 
such a bond. Men who, working in separate rooms of 
the house of science, find common understanding, create 
another. Occasionally between the sciences, and more 
rarely between a science and other parts of our experi- 
ence and knowledge, there is a correspondence, an anal- 
ogy, a partial mapping of two sets of ideas and words. 
We learn then to translate from one language into an- 
other. Ours is thus a united world, united by countless 
bonds. Everything can be related to anything; everything 
cannot be related to everything. It may perhaps then be 
a beginning of wisdom to learn of the virtues, of the re- 
straint and tolerance, and of the sense of fraternity that 
will be asked of us, if, in this largely new world, we are 
to live, not in chaos, but in community. 


237 


